OK,
WELL WELCOME TO THE WEDNESDAY
OCTOBER 18TH TWO THOUSAND
TWENTY THREE ELECTRONIC MEETING
OF THE ANAPRA TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT THIS MEETING SIMILARLY
TO AN IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ONLY TO SPEAK
DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITY IS PLEASE
CALL TWO ZERO SIX THREE THREE
SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND
THAT'S OUR MEETING ID NUMBER
NINE THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT
FIVE TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR
JOIN VIA THE ZOOME LINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLIC AGENDA
AND THE PUBLIC NOTICES SECTION
OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND ON THE
BROADCAST OF THIS MEETING ON
CTM CHANNEL 16 XRF ECONOMIC
FORUM MALCORRA I'VE RECEIVED
GRANTS FROM COMMISSIONER
MUNGO'S WHO WILL BE ABLE TO
ATTEND PLEASE SEE HERE AND FROM
WHERE YOUR DIALING WHEN YOUR
NAME IS CALLED COMMISSIONER
BOLDEN HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER ACKMANN YOUR INNER
COMMISSIONER BROGAN HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER HAUTAMKI HEAR
FROM ANOTHER COMMISSIONER HOOK
OR FROM ANOTHER COMMISSIONER
KEILLER FROM IN OUR MR. CLAMAN
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER.
OK COMMISSIONER CARPENTER HI
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
OK COMMISSIONER HAS HERE COME
IN HERE COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
>> GOLDIES IS ABSOLUTELY IN MY
EAR FROM TYRONNE TOWNSHIP AND I
BELIEVE WE HAVE A QUORUM THERE.
>> THANK YOU.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE AGENDA
AND APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
>> ALL SEE NONE.
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE CONSENT AGENDA AS PRESENTED
BY DULY SECONDED A ONE MOVE ALL
IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION.
PLEASE JUST SAY YES OR RAISE
YOUR HAND.
YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED SAY NO OR
RAISE YOUR HAND CONSENT AGENDA
IS APPROVED.
NEXT UP WE THE PUBLIC COMMENT
SECTION THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL
TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN
NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND A
THIRD MEETING I'D NUMBER NINE
THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE
TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR KANEKI
AS DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA,
CITY STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE
BY ONE USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER FOR
THE PERSON YOU MIGHT ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON YOUR
PHONE OR SELECTED RAISED HAND
BUTTON THEN ZOOM DON'T HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK
WHEN SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A
QUIET AREA, MUTE ANY TELEVISION
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THAT CAN
HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
CHRISTOPHER WHO DO WE HAVE NOW?
>> THE FIRST NUMBER IS ENDING
IN NINE FIVE FIVE.
I WILL NOW ALLOW ME TO SPEAK.
YOU HAVE UP TO THREE MINUTES AS
SOON AS YOU START.
HI GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS KIRK WESTFALL.
THIRTY FIVE OR FIVE CHARTER
PLACE JUST WOULD LIKE TO CALL
IN TO SUPPORT THE RESOLUTION
REGARDING LINCOLN CONVERSION AS
AS THE RESOLUTION LAYS OUT THE
SAFETY CASE FOR LANE
CONVERSIONS IS REALLY SOLID.
THERE'S A SIGNIFICANT BODY
OF RESEARCH ON THE SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS OF LANE
CONVERSIONS FOR EVERY CATEGORY
OF ROAD USER PEDESTRIANS,
CYCLISTS, MOTORISTS FROM BOTH
ALL OVER THE COUNTRY AND FROM
OUR OWN EXPERIENCE IN ANN
ARBOR, THE CITY'S COMMITMENT TO
VISION ZERO MAKES IT VERY CLEAR
THAT ZERO NINE ZERO AND AS FAR
AS I CAN TELL IT'S PRACTICALLY
IMPOSSIBLE TO HAVE VISION ZERO
COMPLIANT MULTI LANE CAR ROADS
IF WE HAD TO REBUILD OUR ROAD
NETWORK FROM SCRATCH, ASSUMING
WE WOULDN'T WANT TO RECREATE
ANY ROADS THAT HURT PEOPLE LIKE
OUR MULTI LANE ROADS
DISPROPORTIONATELY DO SO WE
WOULDN'T WANT ROADS WHERE
TRANSIT WAS SLOWER THAN DRIVING
OR WHERE WE WOULDN'T ALLOW OUR
CHILDREN TO BIKE OR HAD TO
WORRY ABOUT THEM CROSSING.
I THINK ON A DAILY BASIS
BECAUSE MY OWN SON HAS TO GO TO
AT THE CROSS A DANGEROUS MULTI
LANE ROAD TO GET TO HERE ON
HIGH SCHOOL AND TO ME IT'S JUST
NOT NECESSARY AND I'M GLAD
YOU'RE CONSIDERING REFORMING
THESE ROADS.
THAT SAID, I'D LIKE TO SUGGEST
A COUPLE OF MODIFICATIONS FOR
YOUR CONSIDERATION WITH REGARD
TO THE PARTIAL RESCINDING
OF RESOLUTION ARE EIGHTEEN TO
SEVENTY FIVE.
I THINK THAT'S A GREAT THING TO
DO.
I
, I, I GUESS I WAS CURIOUS AS
TO WHY WE'RE LEAVING THE REST
OF THE WHEREAS THE REST OF THE
RESULT OF THAT RESOLUTION IN
PLACE BECAUSE IT IT SPELLS OUT
A NEIGHBOR NOTIFICATION PROCESS
AS WELL AS ADDITIONAL PROCESS
WITH TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BACK AND FORTH WHICH WOULD
CAUSE A SIGNIFICANT DELAY I
THINK IN IMPLEMENTATION.
SECONDLY I THINK IT WOULD BE
WISE TO STRIKE THE REFERENCE TO
THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION GUIDANCE
OF 25000 ADT THRESHOLD BECAUSE
THAT CONFLICTS WITH VISION ZERO
AND THEY JUST GENERALLY DON'T
THINK WE SHOULD BE PUTTING ANY
FAITH IN THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
GUIDANCE BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT A
VISION ZERO EIGHT THIRTY SIX.
AND LASTLY, I WOULD LIKE YOU TO
SHARE IN ONE OF THE RESOLVE
CLAUSES WHAT YOUR VISION IS FOR
HOW QUICKLY THESE REFORMS
SHOULD BE DONE.
A COUNCIL HAS UNTIL 2025 TO
ELIMINATE DEATH AND SERIOUS
INJURY.
SO I ENCOURAGE YOU TO DO THE
MATH AND ASPIRE TO MEET THAT
AND LET COUNCIL DEBATE WHETHER
THEY CHOOSE TO DEDICATE THE
RESOURCES OR NOT.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION.
>> I LOOK FORWARD TO THE
DISCUSSION.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
OK, NEXT SPEAKER IS CLARK
TANIZAKI.
YOU WILL NOW BE ALLOWED TO
SPEAK.
YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES AND I'LL
GIVE YOU A 30 SECOND HEAD START
AND HEADS UP
THERE.
>> MY NAME IS CLASS CHINASKI.
I LIVE IN ANN ARBOR AND TONIGHT
I'M REPRESENTING THE MICHIGAN
ASSOCIATION OF RAILROAD
PASSENGERS, A GROUP THAT HAS
BEEN IN OPERATION NOW FOR FIFTY
YEARS.
MY COMMENTS ARE WITH REGARD TO
THE PLANS OF HIM TO IMPROVE
SAFETY INCLUDING FENCING ALONG
THE MICHIGAN LINE THROUGH ANN
ARBOR.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF CONTENTION ON THIS.
I SEE PEOPLE GOING IN DIFFERENT
DIRECTIONS AND THE RESOLUTION
PASSED BY CITY COUNCIL THE
OTHER NIGHT WHEN YOU GOT INTO
THE RESOLVED PART YOU HEARD
CALLS FOR REENGAGE COORDINATOR
COMMUNICATE AND SO FORTH.
BUT MORE COMMUNICATION WILL NOT
HAPPEN UNLESS THERE'S A
MECHANISM IN PLACE TO CARRY IT
OUT.
WHAT I'M PROPOSING IS EITHER A
SUBCOMMITTEE OF THIS COMMISSION
OR MAYBE SOMEBODY FROM THE CITY
ADMINISTRATION TO MONITOR
WHAT'S GOING ON.
WORK IS A COORDINATOR, GET THE
DIFFERENT PARTIES INVOLVED
TOGETHER.
CITY OF ANN ARBOR EMDEN, THEIR
CONSULTANT BORDER BORDER TRAIL
RESIDENTS FROM THE AREA THEY
TRY TO COME TO SOME CONSENSUS
AT LEAST LET PEOPLE KNOW WHAT'S
GOING ON BECAUSE THERE ARE A
LOT OF DIFFERENT CLAIMS MADE.
SOME ARE HERE TO BE TRUE AND
SOME NOT SO TRUE BUT I THINK
THIS WOULD REALLY HELP MATTERS
PLEASE CONSIDERING DOING THIS
ALSO I WANT TO GIVE A SHOUT OUT
TO JOHN WATERMAN WHO IS THERE
WITH HIS MEMBERS FOR PEAKE WHO
WILL BE RESIGNING LATER ON.
I'M ON A LOCAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
FOR THE SMART BUS SYSTEM AND
THEY COME TO MEETINGS IN
DETROIT ALMOST EVERY MEETING.
>> SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND I
THANK YOU.
OK, I DON'T SEE ANYONE ELSE
WITH RAISE RACE HAND IF THERE'S
ANYONE WOULD LIKE TO COME IN
THIS IS YOUR TIME.
OK, BRETT, I THINK WE ARE GOOD
TO GO.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO NO ONE YET WOULD HAVE LIKED
PUT OUT TO THE COMMISSIONERS
THAT THERE WERE SEVEN EMAILS
RECEIVED SINCE THE LAST
MEETING.
SO THOSE ARE INCLUDED IN YOUR
PACKET.
PLEASE PLEASE REVIEW THOSE IF
YOU HAVEN'T ALREADY NEXT SORRY
TO INTERJECT I WANT TO SAY SOME
OF THOSE WERE UPLOADED I THINK
WHAT WAS IT TODAY CHRIS OR
YESTERDAY BECAUSE SOME CAME IN
LATE SO I YOU IF YOU OPEN THE
PACKET ON FRIDAY IF YOU SAW TWO
OR THREE SOME OTHER ONES CAME
IN.
>> SO JUST LIKE THE HIGHLIGHT
BUT THANK YOU BREITBURN AS WELL
.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP BUSINESS FIRST ROADSIDE
RESOLUTION DARMA HAS DRAFTED A
RESOLUTION SHE'D LIKE US TO
CONSIDER FOR A RECOMMENDATION
THIS EVENING RELATED TO ROAD
DIETZE ALSO KNOWN AS THE ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS.
SO DARMOUTH, YOU COULD WALK US
THROUGH WHAT YOU'VE AUTHORED
AND WE'RE OPEN TO THE FLOOR TO
QUESTIONS AND DISCUSSION.
THANKS.
I'D BE HAPPY TO GIVE A PREAMBLE
AND THEN MAYBE WE CAN PUT THE
RESOLUTION ON THE SCREEN WITH
THE RESOLVE CLAUSES.
SO FIRST I WANT TO START OUT BY
GIVING CREDIT TO MY COLLEAGUE
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS.
WE'VE BEEN WORKING TOGETHER ON
THIS RESOLUTION FOR QUITE SOME
TIME WITH STAFF ON IT'S TRULY
BEEN A TEAM EFFORT SO I
APPRECIATE THE WORK THAT SHE'S
DONE WITH ME AND ALSO THE WORK
OF STAFF.
THIS HAS BEEN THROUGH A FEW
DIFFERENT REVISIONS AND REALLY
OUR GOAL WAS TO BE ABLE TO
FEASIBLY MEET THE AMBITIONS
OF OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND
OUR VISION ZERO GOAL WHICH IS
MATCHING THE PUBLIC COMMENTS
FUNDAMENTALLY THIS RESOLUTION
IS ABOUT SAVING LIVES AS
EVERYONE THIS TABLE I THINK
KNOWS SPEED KILLS THAT
SERIOUSLY INJURES AND WIDER
MULTI LANE ROADS ENCOURAGE
SPEEDING AND ARE JUST MORE
DANGEROUS FOR ALL ROAD USERS.
AN INTERESTING FACT THAT WE PUT
IN THE RESOLUTION STREETS WITH
FOUR OR MORE LANES COMPRISE
JUST SEVEN PERCENT OF OUR
STREETS WITHIN THE CITY BUT
ALSO ACCOUNT FOR 40 PERCENT
OF SEVERE CRASHES.
SO WE ALREADY KNOW THAT THE
CITY AND STAFF ARE TAKING
SERIOUS STEPS TO ADDRESS DEADLY
SPEEDS ON OUR ROADS, THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND LANE
REDUCTIONS OR RECONFIGURATIONS
IN THE EXISTING TOOLBOX.
BUT BASICALLY WHAT THIS
RESOLUTION IS ASKING IS CITY
COUNCIL TO DIRECT THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO UTILIZE THE
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AS
WELL AS THE ANNUAL RESURFACING
PROGRAM TO EVALUATE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ROAD
CONFIGURATIONS AND TO
INCORPORATE THESE INTO THE
ANNUAL PLAN MAY DO SO.
YOU WILL SEE A LITTLE BIT OF I
THINK TRAFFIC CHANGES MIGHT
STILL BE IN HERE BECAUSE THERE
ARE A COUPLE THINGS THAT CHANGE
SINCE THE LAST TIME THAT WE
TALKED TO A STAFF SO I KIND
OF WANTED TO CALL THAT OUT.
DO YOU WANT TO GO TO THE RESULT
CLAUS'S AND I CAN TALK THROUGH
THEM.
THERE ARE A LOT OF WHERE'S
CLAUSES SO I'M SORRY YOU HAVE
TO SCROLL SO MUCH.
ONE THING I DID WANT TO NOTE IS
I THINK THAT IN THE LAST
MEETING IF I RECALL CORRECTLY
WE WERE PRESENTED WITH THE
CITY'S APPROACH TO LANE
REDUCTIONS, LANE
RECONFIGURATIONS AND I BELIEVE
IN THAT PRESENTATION THERE WAS
A FIGURE OF A CERTAIN NUMBER
OF ROADS AND THEY WERE ALL
LISTED WHICH WE LISTED IN THE
IN THE WHEREAS CLAUSES TO IT I
BELIEVE.
>> BUT WHAT NO BRAKES POINTED
OUT TO ME AFTER TAKING A BIKE
RIDE LAST WEEK IS LIKE WE HAVE
OTHER PATCHES IN THE CITY AND
ONE EXAMPLE IS STRETCH OF ROAD
BETWEEN ON ON LIBERTY BETWEEN
MAPLE AND STADIUM IS FIVE LANES
AND THEN THE REST OF IT I THINK
IS THREE LANES.
SO THERE ARE OTHER PATCHES
MULTI-WAY ROAD THROUGHOUT THE
CITY THAN THE ONES LYSTER WHICH
IS WHY WE CHANGE THAT TO MOST
SO FIRST RESOLVE CLAUSE SAYS TO
USE THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM AS WELL AS THE ANNUAL
RESURFACING PROGRAM TO LOOK FOR
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS AND
INCORPORATED INTO THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS WORKPLAN AND THE
GOAL IS REALLY TO RECONFIGURE
MULTI LANE ROADS TO ADVANCE OUR
CITY'S SAFETY AND
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS.
THIS PROVIDES THIS IS WHAT I
ADDED AFTER TALKING WITH STAFF
AND BASICALLY SAYS THAT AFTER
AN EVALUATION OF STAFF ADVISES
AGAINST LANE REDUCTION IN A
SPECIFIC INSTANCE WE
RECOMMENDED THAT RECOMMENDATION
BE SUBMITTED TO CITY COUNCIL
AND SUBJECT FOR THEIR APPROVAL
.
AND I THINK BASICALLY WHAT THIS
IS TRYING TO ALLOW FOR IS THAT
THERE COULD BE A REASON NOT TO
SUCH AS PLANS DEDICATED
BUSTLINE, SOMETHING OF THAT
NATURE.
AND SO I THINK WE WANTED TO
ALLOW SOME ROOM FOR THAT.
I CAN KEEP GOING OR I DON'T
KNOW HOW YOU WANT TO RUN THIS
IF YOU WANT TO PAUSE.
YEAH, MAYBE I'LL GO.
THERE'S ONLY A FEW RESOLVE
CLAUSES SO MAYBE ALL YEAH.
LET'S STOP AFTER THE FIRST ONE.
I THINK THIS ONE KIND
OF CONTAINS THE NEED OF THE
RESOLUTION ANYWAY SO QUESTIONS
COMING TO US PETE.
WE'VE GOT I'VE GOT A COUPLE
OF OBSERVATIONS.
FIRST OF ALL I THINK THIS IS A
REALLY GOOD CAUSE.
I MEAN THE WHOLE THING IS VERY
GOOD.
THIS MIGHT BE THE PLACE TO PUT
IN OUR PROJECTED TIMELINE.
I GUESS I'D LIKE TO PROPOSE
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE SINCE THAT
ALIGNS WITH VISION OUR VISION
ZERO GOAL.
SO I GUESS I'D LIKE TO PROPOSE
THAT WE ADD OUR TIMING FOR WHEN
WE EXPECT THIS TO BE DONE.
>> THE OTHER THING I'D LIKE TO
SAY THIS ONE THEN IS THAT WE
MENTIONED TWO WAYS TO DO THIS
SO CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS THE AND
THE THE RESURFACING PROGRAM AND
THE SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
BUT IF THERE'S SOME OTHER WAY
THAT WE COULD ACHIEVE IN SOME
OTHER WAY TO GET FUNDING OR
SOME OTHER PROGRAM LIKE I
WOULDN'T WANT TO EXCLUDE THAT.
SO IF WE COULD MAKE THIS SAY
LIKE INCLUDING YOU KNOW,
INCLUDING THESE METHODS, LET'S
FIND A WAY TO DO IT THAT IS TO
KEEP OUR OPTIONS OPEN IS I
GUESS WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO WAS
HITTING ON SOMETHING THERE AT
THE END THERE THAT I WAS NOTING
AS WELL THAT I THINK THIS
IS
SOMETHING THAT THIS IS A NOTE
THAT I HAD MADE WHEN WE WERE
REVIEWING THIS THAT I THINK
DIDN'T GET CHANGED.
>> I WOULD SUGGEST THAT INSTEAD
OF SAYING AS WELL AS THE ANNUAL
RESURFACING RECONSTRUCTION
PROGRAM, I WOULD SUGGEST THAT
WE SAY AS WELL AS CAPITAL
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS THAT
CASTS A WIDER NET BY SAYING
ANNUAL RESURFACING
RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM.
WE'RE ACTUALLY LIMITING WHAT
PROJECTS THIS WOULD APPLY TO.
SO THAT WOULD BE MY SUGGESTION
IS TO MODIFY THAT.
>> YADIRA, IS THAT NOT
COVERED BY THE PART THAT SAYS
INCORPORATE INTO THE ANNUAL
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN?
>> IT'S LIKE THE NEXT SENTENCE
DON'T I'M TRYING TO CHANGE IT.
I JUST I WAS UNDER THE
IMPRESSION THAT THAT WAS
CATCHING IT.
>> I WOULD I MEAN I WOULD
SUGGEST CHANGING IT I THINK
WOULD BE CLEARER.
OK, BUT ME IT READS LIKE THOSE
OTHER THINGS FILTER FILTER
BEFORE IT WOULD GET INTO THE
VIP, YOU KNOW, OK, YEAH.
OR IF THERE'S ANYTHING THAT
DOESN'T SHOW UP IN THE CITY FOR
ONE REASON OR OTHER LIKE
CAPITAL PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE PROJECTS DON'T
ALWAYS SHOW UP BY NAME IN THE
CITY.
LIKE I SAID IT'S JUST A WIDER
NET AND I THINK IT WOULD BE
CLEARER FOR US PEOPLE EXECUTING
IT.
>> GOT IT.
I WILL LET OTHER PEOPLE SPEAK
SO I'VE GOT A QUESTION WITH
THIS B SO IT'S NOT AN ANNUAL OR
ANY KIND OF PERIODIC
EVALUATION.
IT IS IT'S INTENDED TO ONE TIME
EVALUATION SO LIKE ONE THE ONE
OF THE MORE TELLING ROADS IF IT
GOES THROUGH A RESURFACING OR
SOMETHING ELSE THEN IT'S NOT
ADVISED TO DO A LANE REDUCTION.
IS THAT IT OR DOES IT IF A ROAD
DOESN'T GET NOMINATED FOR SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM OR HAS A
SKIP PROJECT ON IT, IT WON'T BE
CONSIDERED OR IS A VISION THAT
EVERY X AMOUNT OF TIME ON NINE
OF THESE WOULD, COULD OR SHOULD
BE EVALUATED.
I THINK THE INTENT WAS TO TRY
TO INCORPORATE THIS INTO
EXISTING PROGRAMS AND SO THE
PURPOSE IN CALLING OUT
RESURFACING AND CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS WAS THAT THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT THE CITY IS
ENGAGED IN ACROSS THE CITY THIS
YEAR THEY DID SOME MULTI LANE
ROADS.
SO YOU KNOW, AS PART OF THAT
PROCESS OF EVALUATING IT FOR
AND THEN WE ALSO KNOW THAT
CONCURRENT WITH THAT WE HAVE A
BIG PUSH FOR THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM WHERE THE
CITY STAFF HAS BEEN ENGAGED IN
EVALUATING DIFFERENT OPTIONS
AND ALSO THEY'VE DONE A LOT
OF WORK TO PRIORITIZE, YOU
KNOW, WHAT ARE THE MOST HIGH
PRIORITY AND AND BECAUSE THESE
TEND TO BE WHERE THE MOST
CRASHES ARE, I WOULD THINK
THAT, YOU KNOW, THEY'RE WITHIN
THAT AND SO IT SHOULD BE I
GUESS WHAT I'M SAYING IS PART
OF ALL OF THOSE EXISTING
PROCESSES OR THAT WAS THE
INTENT.
I'M ALSO HAPPY TO GO AHEAD,
RAYMOND.
YOU KNOW, PLEASE FINISH YOUR
THOUGHT.
I WAS GOING TO ASK A DIFFERENT
QUESTION AND THAT'S OK.
>> SO PETE MENTIONED WHY NOT
PUT A DATE ON THIS TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND I GUESS I JUST
WANTED TO SPEAK TO THE
RATIONALE BECAUSE AN EARLIER
VERSION OF THIS DID HAVE A DATE
AROUND IT.
THERE WAS CONCERN THAT IT WOULD
KNOCK OUT OTHER IMPORTANT WORK
THAT IS GOING ON AROUND THE
CITY TO MAKE OUR ROADS SAFER.
AND SO THIS CHANGE I GUESS WHAT
YOU SEE BEFORE YOU IS A RESULT
OF CONVERSATIONS WITH STAFF
THAT I THINK HAD A COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGS AND I PRETTY
CONVINCED THAT THE MOST
FEASIBLE WAY TO MAKE THIS
HAPPEN WITHOUT PUSHING OTHER
IMPORTANT WORK OUT OF THE WAY
WAS TO DO THIS INCORPORATE IT
WITHIN EXISTING PROGRAMS SO
THAT WAS THE RATIONALE.
OK, SO IT'S IT ANTICIPATED THAT
IT WILL REMAIN A PART OF THE
SPEEDMAN PLAN FOREVER.
IT'S ALWAYS IN THE TOOLKIT.
IT'S NOT THAT WE DIDN'T PICK A
DATE TO SUNSET THIS BUT WE ALSO
DIDN'T PICK A DATE TO EVALUATE
ALL MORE LANE ROADS PRIOR TO
THE ALTHOUGH YEAH WE'RE NOT
SAYING WE'RE GOING TO EVALUATE
ALL OF THEM BY TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE THIS WILL ALWAYS BE
AVAILABLE OPTION AFTER TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AS WELL AND
HOPEFULLY WE'LL GET TO AS MANY
AS WE POSSIBLY CAN BEFORE THEN.
IS THAT THE RIGHT
UNDERSTANDING.
I THINK SO
.
>> I'M I ALSO THE QUESTION DOES
THIS COVER LANE INTERSECTIONS
THERE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF SINGLE LANE
ROADS THAT WHEN THEY COME TO AN
INTERSECTION THEY SPLIT OUT
INTO LEFT TURN RIGHT TURN
LANES, THAT KIND OF THING AND
YOU END UP WITH AN INTERSECTION
THAT ALTHOUGH IT HAS SINGLE
LANE ROADS APPROACHING IT, THE
INTERSECTIONS ARE MAYBE THREE
OR FOUR LANES IN EACH DIRECTION
.
>> THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION WE
HAVE NOT DISCUSSED THAT'S
SPECIFIC INSTANCE NO, THAT
WOULD I THINK ADD WAY, WAY, WAY
MORE FOR BETTER OR FOR WORSE.
BUT I JUST WASN'T SURE IF THAT
IS SOMETHING TO BE CONSIDERED
OR NOT
.
MAYBE THAT CAN I DON'T KNOW.
I DON'T THINK YOU KNOW, WE'RE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO CONSIDER
WHETHER THAT SHOULD BE ADDED
HERE RIGHT RIGHT HERE RIGHT NOW
I GUESS WE'VE BEEN THINK ABOUT
THE OTHER OTHER QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS.
>> YEAH.
BRIAN, IF I MAY DETERMINE THE
NEW LANGUAGE IF YOU COULD WALK
ME THROUGH JUST LOGISTICALLY
HOW THIS PLAYS OUT SO SO
THERE'S KIND OF ONE OF OUR
PROJECT IS OUR STAFF EVALUATED
IT FOR A ROAD RECONFIGURATION
OUR ROAD DIET AND THEN IF WE
DETERMINE THAT IT IS NOT
RECOMMENDED IT IS GOES TO CITY
COUNCIL SUBJECT TO APPROVAL
FROM CITY COUNCIL THAT YES.
>> SORRY.
WHAT'S THE QUESTION?
NO, I JUST I JUST THE SOME
OF THE LANGUAGE I WAS JUST
TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE
TRANSPORTATION BUT I SEE NOW
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS YASARI CHANGING IT
FOR THIS MEETING SO COULD MAYBE
IT'S NOT WORDED IN A VERY CLEAR
WAY AND MAYBE IT SHOULD COME TO
US COMMISSION FIRST BUT
INITIALLY THE VISION WAS YOU
KNOW AND THIS CAME OUT OF AGAIN
DISCUSSIONS WITH STAFF WHERE I
THINK THE QUESTION FOR ME WAS
IF WE LEFT THIS OUT BECAUSE
INITIALLY DID NOT HAVE THE
TRACK CHANGES IN HERE IS THAT A
CHANGE FROM CURRENT PRACTICE
LIKE WOULD THAT RESULT IN THE
CHANGE THAT WE WANT TO SEE
WHICH IS A MOVE TOWARDS
RECONFIGURING THESE ROADS AWAY
FROM MULTI LANE AND SO I THINK
THAT'S WHY WE INSERTED THIS
KIND OF YOU KNOW, ANOTHER LAYER
BASICALLY A LAYER OF APPROVAL
TO NOT DO IT.
SO THE DEFAULT SHOULD BE WE
SHOULD DO IT AND IF WE DON'T,
THERE SHOULD BE A GOOD REASON
AND SUBJECT TO APPROVAL
OF COUNCIL FLAT, THE RATIONALE
THANK YOU
.
FOLLOWING UP ON WHAT YOU SAID
YOU ASKED ABOUT WHAT QUALIFIES
LIKE LANE ROADS WITH MULTIPLE
LANES AT INTERSECTIONS.
THAT IS THE THING THAT I AGREE
MIGHT NEED SOME CLARITY BUT
ALSO THE IDEA OF WHAT
CONSTITUTES A MULTI LANE ROAD.
I MEAN IS THAT ALREADY DEFINED
SOMEWHERE ACTUALLY HAS TWO
LANES ON IT BUT THEY'RE IN
OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
>> I DON'T THINK IT NEEDS TO BE
RECONFIGURED.
DIVISION HAS TWO LANES AND IT
BOTH IN THE SAME DIRECTION.
I THINK IT DOES NEED TO BE
RECONFIGURED OR STADIUM TO IN
EACH DIRECTION.
IT NEEDS TO BE CONFIGURED TO
RECONFIGURE.
SO MAYBE THERE'S SOME SOME
CLARITY THERE AND EXACTLY WHAT
WE BY MOBILING ROAD THAT WE'RE
I FOLLOW THE QUESTION OR THE
COMMENT COME UP EARLIER ON I
THINK THE EMAIL WHERE THEY
MIGHT BE TALKING ABOUT AND I
LOOKED UP THE DEFINITION
OF MULTI LANE ROAD AND IT'S HAS
TWO OR MORE LANES GOING IN ONE
DIRECTION I GUESS THE
TRANSPORTATION BOOKS CAN'T TELL
ME IF THAT IS THE RIGHT
DEFINITION BUT I THINK IT DOES
HAVE A SPECIFICITY THERE
.
YEAH.
I MEAN AGAIN I WOULD ASSUME WE
MY UNDERSTANDING IS CONSISTENT
WITH WHAT I THINK THE INTENT IS
WHAT YOU JUST DESCRIBED BUT A
FURTHER CLARIFICATION IS NEEDED
THAT'S AT THIS BODY'S
DISCRETION.
I GUESS BASED ON WHAT YOU GUYS
SAID I'M COMFORTABLE THAT
THERE'S OTHER IMMEDIATE
COMMENTS ON THE FIRST RESULT
AGAIN.
OH, JULIE ZACH I DON'T KNOW IF
THIS IS SPECIFIC TO THE FIRST
RESULT BUT I JUST WONDER HOW
THIS IF IT IF THERE IF IT'S
DECIDED THAT WE DON'T NEED A
DEDICATED BUS LANE BUT THERE
ARE BUSSES THAT GO DOWN THAT
ROAD.
>> HOW WOULD THIS AFFECT BUS
TRAVEL OR YOU KNOW, ARE THE
BUSSES GOING TO BE BLOCKING
HOLDING UP TRAFFIC OR HOW IS
COULD WORK?
SO I'LL TRY TO SPEAK TO THAT
USUALLY WHAT HAPPENS ON ROAD
ROADS THAT HAVE ALREADY BEEN
RECONFIGURED WITH DIETZE THE
TRANSIT VEHICLES ARE ACTUALLY
CONSIDERED PART OF THE TRAFFIC
CALMING SOLUTIONS.
SO USUALLY WHEN A BUS MAKES A
STOP THAT'S ONLY UNLESS THERE'S
A WHEELCHAIR OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT IT'S USUALLY MAYBE TEN TO
FIFTEEN SECONDS AT THE MOST AND
THAT ALLOWS THE VEHICLES TO
KEEP MOVING.
BUT IT ALSO KIND OF PUTS I
DON'T KNOW WHAT'S THE RIGHT
WORD FOR THIS PUTS THE PRUDENT
DRIVER IN CONTROL.
SO WHOEVER IS GOING SLOW US
DOWN THE CORRIDOR ENDS UP, YOU
KNOW, KIND OF DETERMINING THE
SPEED AND THEN IF A BUS IS
PULLED OVER IT'S KIND OF A GRAY
AREA FROM WHAT WE'VE BEEN TOLD
ABOUT IF PEOPLE WANT TO PULL
AROUND IT THEY'RE WELCOME TO.
BUT THAT'S YOU KNOW, THAT'S
THEIR DECISION THAT ADDRESSED
THAT QUESTION, JULIE.
>> AND I CERTAINLY THINK NO, I
GUESS I JUST REALLY LIKE THE
IDEA OF A DEDICATED BUS LANES
AND SO RIGHT NOW WITH THE IN
THIS CLAUSE THE STAFF HAVE TO
GET APPROVAL TO DO A BUS LANE I
THINK IS THAT HOW AM I READING
THAT RIGHT.
SO IS THAT GOING TO DISCOURAGE
BUS LANES?
I DON'T THINK SO.
BUT THAT WAS JUST ONE OF MY
CONCERNS.
A GOOD YET TO SPEAK TO THAT
THAT CERTAINLY WAS NOT THE
INTENT, YOU KNOW, BUT I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE INTERPRETIVE
ACTION REALLY THE INTENT OF IT
WOULD BE GREAT TO HAVE
DEDICATED TO TAKE THESE LANES
AND CONVERT THEM TO A BUS ON MY
LANES.
I WOULD LOVE TO SUPPORT THAT
BUT I THINK IT KIND OF PLAYS
INTO LIKE WHAT ARE THE LONG
TERM PLANS SO IT WAS THIS
WASN'T INTENDED TO PUT AN
OBSTACLE UP.
IT WAS MEANT TO GIVE AN EXAMPLE
OF A GOOD REASON WHY WE WOULD
MAYBE NOT CONVERT IT TO A BIKE
LANE THAT WE WOULD KEEP IT OPEN
FOR BUS.
BUT I APPRECIATE YOUR COMMENTS
.
YES, MATT, THANK YOU AND HELLO
TO EVERYONE FOR THOSE OF I
HAVEN'T MATT I'M MATT CARPENTER
ON THE CEO OVER AT THE ROD.
I THINK THE QUESTION ABOUT BUS
LANES IS ADDRESSED TO THE NEXT
RESOLVED CATEGORY OR PARAGRAPH
AND COUNCILOR NEXT AND I AND
CAN HAVE HAD SOME GOOD
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THAT THIS
AFTERNOON.
I DON'T THINK ANYTHING IN THIS
PARAGRAPH PROHIBITS BUS LANES.
>> THEY'RE MOSTLY HANDLED IN
THE NEXT ONE.
THANKS.
YEAH.
JUST OFF THE TOP OF MY HEAD I
THINK THERE ARE FOUR ONE AREAS
THAT ARE THAT HAVE MORE TWO
LANE ROADS GOING THROUGH THEM
SO IT MIGHT COME UP.
IT MIGHT BE I GUESS IT'S TRUE
THAT IT MIGHT COME UP SO I JUST
MOVE ON TO THE SECOND RESULT
CLAUSE PLEASE.
>> FIRST OF ALL, DO WE WANT TO
FORMALLY AMEND THE FIRST
RESOLVED CLAUSE NOW WITH ITS
RECOMMENDED WORDING FOR THE I
ITS FIRST SENTENCE OF THE FIRST
RESULT CLAUSE AND I'LL MOVE TO
MAKE THAT AMENDMENT.
THIS IS MY OK THANK YOU NICK.
DO YOU WANT TO.
CAN YOU MAYBE SAY THE WORD
WHICH WORDS TO REPLACE AGAIN.
YES.
OR DO YOU WANT ME TO STAND
LANGUAGE WITH A BEZIER.
>> YEAH IF YOU CAN DO THAT IN A
WAY THAT WE CAN SEE IT AND VOTE
ON IT AND GO TONIGHT THEN
THAT'D BE GREAT.
>> YEAH OK MAYBE I SHOULD JUST
SAY IT BECAUSE I'M NOT SURE
THAT'S TRUE THAT SO LET'S SEE
CHERVIN JUST TO GET THE WHOLE
RESULT CLAUSE.
YEAH SO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS IT'S OK
I'M LOSING IT THERE.
IT JUST GOT REALLY BIG SPLIT
SCREEN THE OK NOW IT'S GETTING
REALLY SMALL.
I CAN'T READ IT CAN'T READ IT'S
NOT THAT YOUNG ANYMORE.
>> A LITTLE BIT OF A DELAY HERE
I OK THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS THAT CITY
COUNCIL DIRECT THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO UTILIZE THE
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AS
WELL AS CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS HOMMA.
>> OK, SO THAT WAS APPROVED BY
MOLLY RIGHT MOLLY YEP.
SECONDED BY DARMA.
CAN WE CREATE DO A QUICK VOTE
AND THEN THE FIRST RESULT
CLAUSE BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO THE
NEXT OF COURSE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO ALL THOSE FAVOR OF WELL NO
NO NO NO WE SHOULD GO DOWN THE
WHOLE THING I'M SORRY.
YEAH, WE'LL VOTE ON THE THE
WHOLE NO WAIT.
I'M SORRY.
WE HAVE TO AMEND IT.
WE HAVE TO VOTE ON IT
AMENDMENT.
YEAH.
OK SO LET'S VOTE ON THE
AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST RESULT
CLAUSE AS NICK JUST DESCRIBED
IT ALL THOSE IN FAVOR.
>> SORRY TO I'M NOT THE BEST
PARLIAMENTARIAN BUT I THINK
MAYBE IF AMA SEES THE AMENDMENT
AS FRIENDLY SHE CAN ACCEPT IT
AND THEN IT CAN BE PART OF THE
RESOLUTION AT THE END AS
SUGGESTED IS THAT IT'D WOULD BE
GREAT IF SHE DID TO ME PROBABLY
SHE'LL BE RIGHT MOVING ON
SECOND RESULT WAS OK SO AGAIN
THIS IS TRYING TO INCORPORATE
BUS RAPID TRANSIT AND
FACILITATE A CONVERSATION WITH
THE CITY ABOUT DOING SO.
SO TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCILOR
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO PARTNER
WITH THE RIDE TO PRIORITIZE
PROJECTS THAT FACILITATE THE
INTEGRATION OF BUS RAPID
TRANSIT AS WELL AS NON
MOTORIZED IMPROVEMENTS SUCH AS
THINGS LIKE FLOATING BUS STOPS
TO PROTECT AND ENHANCE BICYCLE
CONNECTIVITY AND PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY ALONG WITH THE TRANSIT
CORRIDORS.
AND PART OF THIS WAS IN
RESPONSE TO SOMETHING THAT I
BELIEVE THAT CAN BROUGHT UP AT
THE LAST MEETING.
I'M JUST TRYING TO REDUCE
CONFLICTS BETWEEN NON MOTORIZED
FOLKS AND GREAT QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS ON SICARI SUBCLAUSE
MET THESE.
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
SO JUST A COUPLE
OF CLARIFICATIONS I'D LIKE TO
SUGGEST.
SO FIRST THE NAME OF THE AGENCY
STILL THE ANN ARBOR AREA
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY.
I ALWAYS IT ALWAYS FEELS LIKE A
STUTTER.
I KNOW A A T.A. IT FEELS
UNNATURAL BUT IF WE WOULDN'T
MIND DON'T PUT THAT IN THERE.
I APPRECIATE IT.
AND THEN I'D LIKE TO GET
FRIENDLY SUGGESTION BUS RAPID
TRANSIT.
I'D LIKE TO SEE JUST REPLACING
THOSE WORDS WITH WITH BUS LANES
COMMA PRIORITY MEASURES AND NON
MOTORIZED IMPROVEMENTS.
THE REASON FOR THAT SUGGESTION
IS BUS RAPID TRANSIT IS SERVICE
.
IT'S NOT THE CHANGE IN THE
STREETSCAPE PERSAY AND WE MAY
WANT OR SEE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS LIKE BUS
LANES WITHOUT A BRT LINE.
AND A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THIS IS
MANY OF THE LARGE RADIAL ROADS
ADDRESSED IN THIS RESOLUTION
ARE SOME OF THE ROADS THAT
BRING COMMUTERS INTO THE CITY
FROM LONGER DISTANCES.
WE HAVE ASPIRATIONS FOR A LARGE
PARK AND RIDE THE EXPRESS BUS
SYSTEM THE FUTURE FOR EXAMPLE
COMING DOWN HIGHWAYS ON THE
PLIMOTH ROAD THAT MAY NOT BE A
BRT SYSTEM BUT IT WOULD REALLY
BENEFIT FROM US LANES AND
PRIORITY MEASURES.
SO JUST FOR CLARIFICATION'S
GOING FORWARD NOT THE NAME
OF THE SERVICE SO MUCH AS IT IS
THE CHANGES IN THE STREETSCAPE.
SO IF WE CAN JUST REPLACE HAVE
IT THE INTEGRATION OF BUS LANES
COMMA PRIORITY MEASURES AND NON
MOTORIZED I THINK THAT MIGHT BE
MORE CLEAR.
THANK YOU DARREN.
YOU CONCERNED THAT FRIENDLY I
DO.
I WONDER IF WE WANT ANY
DISCUSSION ABOUT IT JUST FIRST
LOOK THE OTHER COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS
JUST MAYBE SOMEONE
COULD WORK ON SMOOTHING OUT THE
SENTENCE A BIT BECAUSE I THINK
IT MAKES THE SENTENCE A LITTLE
COMPARE BECAUSE AND YOU HAVE
THAT SUCH AS PLUS THEY'RE SO IT
MAKES A LITTLE FINESSE
VERY
AGREEMENT THAT YOU HAVE TO
FINESSE ON THE FLY.
I THINK THAT'S FRIENDLY AS FAR
AS I'M CONSIDERED.
>> NO ONE HAS GOT ANYTHING ELSE
TO SAY BUT HEY
, SO WE MOVE ON
TO THE NEXT HOUR.
>> YEAH.
LET'S MOVE ON TO THE FINAL
RESULT CAUSE OK RESOLVED
BASICALLY THIS IS THE ONE
THAT'S ABOUT REPEALING COUNCIL
MEASURES IN THE PAST THAT I
THINK HAVE BEEN SOMEWHAT OF AN
OBSTACLE TO ROAD CONFIGURATIONS
AND THAT'S REPEALING
FROM THIS
RESOLUTION THAT WAS FROM TWENTY
EIGHTEEN THAT REQUIRES THE
CONDUCTS IN CONJUNCTION WITH
ANY PROPOSED LANE REDUCTION
CITY STAFF SHALL PROVIDE
COUNSEL WITH CURRENT TRAFFIC
VOLUME DATA INCLUDING PEAK HOUR
VOLUMES AND VOLUME TO CAPACITY
RATIOS AS WELL AS PROJECTIONS
FOR SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS AND
TRAFFIC DELAYS.
>> SO WE DON'T NEED THIS AND IT
SEEMS LIKE IT'S DONE.
OBSTACLE STAFF CAN CARRY OUT
THEIR WORK WITHOUT BRINGING
THIS PERFECT.
ARE THERE OTHER THINGS OF VALUE
THAT ARE EIGHTEEN TO SEVEN FIVE
THAT ARE WORTH KEEPING?
>> I GUESS I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
IN THE REST OF THE THAT'S A
GOOD QUESTION.
IT'S BEEN A WHILE SINCE I'VE
LOOKED AT THE WHOLE THING AND
I'M CURIOUS.
WELL NEVER MIND.
I RETRACT ANY COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS FROM ANYONE ELSE
OK
SEEING NO OTHER COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS ON THIS AND THE
ENTIRE THING ON THE HIGH
RESOLUTION
.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
I'VE GOT TO OK SO I DO HAVE
ANOTHER UNDER THAT LAST RESULT
BECAUSE I DO HAVE A COUPLE
OTHER THINGS I'D LIKE TO
RECOMMEND FOR AN AMENDMENT
WE'VE GOT THE WHEREAS CLAUSE
THAT LISTS THE STREETS AND I'D
LIKE TO EITHER ADD SOME TO IT
OR MAKE THAT A LITTLE MORE
FAR-REACHING SO IT SAYS THERE
ARE AT LEAST NINE MULTI LANE
ROADS SO WE CAN EITHER SAY
INCLUDING STADIUM BOULEVARD
PACARD ETC. OR WE COULD ADD
BROADWAY FIFTH DIVISION AND
NORTH MAIN WASHINGTON ON HERE
ON POSSIBLY ALSO GREEN ROAD AND
SOMEONE OF THEIR LIBERTY.
SO THERE'S OTHERS OUT THERE
LIKE I DON'T WANT TO LIMIT JUST
THE ONES THAT WE'VE LISTED ON
THERE SO I'D LIKE TO MAKE SURE
THAT THIS IS FAR REACHING.
SO I DON'T KNOW HOW HOW DO WE
HOW DO YOU WANT TO GO ABOUT
CHANGING RESULTS WHEREAS
CLAUSES OR DO WE NEED TO FIND
YEAH, I THINK IT'D BE THE SAME
WAY IF THE GOVERNMENT CONSIDERS
YEAH I WOULDN'T MIND SEEING
INSTEAD OF THE HYPHEN SAYING
SOMETHING LIKE INCLUDING THAT
LIST AMONG OTHERS OR OTHER
AMONG THE OTHER CANDIDATES I
DON'T KNOW MAKE IT VERY CLEAR
THAT THIS IS NOT AN EXHAUSTIVE
LIST AND THERE MIGHT BE OTHERS
AND OTHERS MIGHT COME INTO OUR
RESPONSIBILITY MAIN WASHED-OUT
HERE ON LIKE WE'VE GOT THAT OUT
THERE THAT POSSIBILITY OF US
TAKING OVER FROM INDIA.
WHAT IF THAT HAPPENED?
WE WOULD WANT THESE TO BE
INCLUDED FOR CONSIDERATION.
YOU I'D BE FINE WITH THAT.
>> IN FACT I WOULD SUGGEST THAT
WE DON'T TRY TO ENUMERATE THEM
ALL BECAUSE WE WILL PROBABLY
MISS THEM.
SO I THINK BETTER TO SAY
INCLUDING AND OTHERS AND OK OK
SO I WOULD SAY UNDER THE CITY'S
JURISDICTION NOW OR IN THE
FUTURE SOMETHING LIKE THAT JUST
I MEAN I GUESS MAYBE SINCE IT'S
WHEREAS CLAUSE IT'S NOT THAT
CRITICAL
SO OK SO JUST WE'RE
JUST GOING TO HAVE THE WORD
INCLUDING THAT'S WHAT IT SOUNDS
LIKE AND MAYBE SOME MORE WORDS
AT THE END OF THE SENTENCE OR
END OF THE END OF THAT WHEREAS
SO DO YOU WANT A PROPOSAL OR DO
YOU WANT I THINK YOU GET THAT
THAT WHAT WE'RE GOING AFTER.
RIGHT.
SO YEAH BUT I'M NOT SURE
THERE'S A POSSIBLE FUTURE
INCLUDING POSSIBLY OTHERS, YOU
KNOW.
>> BUT ARE WE VOTING ON THIS
TONIGHT BECAUSE IF SO I GUESS I
KIND OF WANT TO I DON'T KNOW IF
WE NEEDS THE LANGUAGE NOW
RAYMOND.
>> YEAH, DEFINITELY INTEND TO
VOTE ON IT.
YEAH I'M TAKING NOTES I
PROBABLY DON'T HAVE THE EXACT
WORDING FOR EVERYTHING BUT LIKE
SO FOR THIS ONE I SAID
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WHICH ISN'T ANY EXACT WORDS
ANYONE SAID BUT I THINK
CAPTURES THE SENTIMENT THAT
SANSKRIT YEAH OK OK YOU ALL
RIGHT.
OTHER COMMENTS QUESTIONS BEFORE
WE VOTE SO DO WE NEED TO VOTE
ON THAT.
DO I NEED TO MOVE THAT WE
REPLACED OR DO WE ADD INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO STADIUM I
GUESS I ASSUMED THAT THAT WOULD
BE FRONT AS I CONSIDER IT A
FRIENDLY AMENDMENT.
OK OK ALL RIGHT
LET'S SEE THE
OTHER THING WAS THEN STRIKING
WHEREAS CLAUSE HERE BROUGHT
THIS UP IN PUBLIC COMMENT
STRIKING WHEREAS CLAUSE ABOUT
THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATOR GUESS I DON'T
WANT THE TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND
TO BE MISCONSTRUED AS GUIDANCE
FOR THIS IN THE FUTURE LIKE IT
EVEN IF THEY ARE ABOVE TWENTY
FIVE THOUSAND I STILL WANT TO
EVALUATE
ANY OTHER THOUGHTS ON
THAT NOW I I THOUGHT IS THAT IT
DOESN'T HURT.
I MEAN IT'S JUST A HIGHER
NUMBER THAN WE WOULD CONSIDER
BUT YOU IF YOU SAY IT DOESN'T
HURT TO HAVE THE CLAUSON
DONATION I THINK THAT'S MY
FEELING.
BUT DIMO, YOU'RE YOU'RE MY
RATIONALE AND WHY I THINK IT
BELONGS THERE.
I THINK IT BELONGS THERE
BECAUSE SETTING A CONTEXT IN
WHICH EVEN AN ORGANIZATION
THAT'S NOT KNOWN FOR BEING
SUPER PROGRESSIVE ON
TRANSPORTATION HAS SET A VOLUME
THRESHOLD THAT MOST OF OUR
ROADS, YOU KNOW, ARE NOT
SURPASSING AND I THINK THAT'S
WORTH POINTING COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIDGES AND I ARE WORKING ON A
SEPARATE LEVEL OF SERVICE
POLICY IDEA THAT I THINK GETS
THAT WHETHER VEHICLE COUNTS AND
DELAYS ARE REALLY THE BEST WAY
THAT WE SHOULD BE THINKING
ABOUT HOW WE EVALUATE ROAD
CONFIGURATIONS.
BUT IN THIS CASE AS A WAREHOUSE
CLAUSE IT SEEMED WORTH CALLING
OUT IT STILL SAYS TO EVALUATE
THE ROADS.
SO IT'S NOT I DON'T THINK IT
RESTRICTS ANY ANYWAY THAT'S
THAT'S MY VIEW.
YEAH.
I MEAN IT'S NOT A RESULT.
CLOSETS WHEREAS IT'S A PIECE
OF INFORMATION TO PROVIDE SOME
CONTEXT ABOUT WHAT THE FHA SAYS
BUT I DON'T KNOW ANY OTHER
THOUGHTS ON THAT ONE
IS YOU ON
A I.
I THINK DHARMA'S EXPLANATIONS
ADEQUATE SO I THINK WE CAN
LEAVE IT.
>> WE CAN LEAVE IT OK OK I DO
HAVE ONE MORE THAN
I WOULD LIKE
TO ADD A AS I MENTIONED A TIME
BOUND REQUIREMENT OR THE GOAL I
LIKE THE GOAL TO BE TIME
TIMEOUT.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT SHOULD GO
INTO THE FIRST RESULT OR THE
SEPARATE RESULT BUT I GUESS I
WOULD LIKE I I WOULD LIKE TO
PROPOSE THAT WE SAY WITH THE
GOAL OF RECONFIGURING ALL MULTI
LANE ROADS BY DECEMBER THIRTY
FIRST TWENTY TWENTY FIVE TO
ADVANCE THE CITY'S SAFETY AND
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS I COULD
PUT LANGUAGE IN THAT IF THAT
WOULD BE HELPFUL.
WOULD YOU WANT TO SAY THE GOAL
OF CONFIGURING OR THE GOAL
OF EVALUATING ALL ROADS FOR A
RECONFIGURATION?
IT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
I DON'T KNOW IF I COULD SIGN UP
FOR THE FIRST ONE.
I THINK THE POINT OF THIS IS
THE EVALUATION PROCESS BUT I
DON'T THINK WE'RE DICTATING THE
OUTCOME OF THAT PROCESS
ESPECIALLY YOU KNOW, I I AGREE
WITH YOU.
>> I THINK THAT'S A GOOD POINT.
LET ME LET ME
A BIT MORE MUTED
IF YOU'RE
I THINK THAT'S A GOOD
RECOMMENDATION OF EVALUATING
THE GOAL OF EVALUATING LET ME
LET DHARMA AND THEN WE'LL TALK
ABOUT YOU GUYS MENTIONED THAT
THERE WAS SOME MENTION OF A
DATE IN A PREVIOUS GENERATION
SO MAYBE TALK ABOUT WHERE THAT
CONVERSATION WENT.
YEAH, I MEAN THIS WILL BE OUR
FOCAL POINT.
THIS WILL BE THE WORK WE DO SO
I MEAN EVALUATE THESE
EVALUATIONS ARE NOT EASY.
THEY TAKE A LOT OF DATA
COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
.
SO IF THIS IS THE WORK WE
SHOULD DO PRIMARILY THEN THIS
WOULD BE THE WORK WE WOULD DO.
SO WHAT WE WERE SUGGESTING THE
REASON WHY WE SUGGEST WHEN A
ROAD IS KIND OF UP FOR PROGRAM
IMPROVEMENTS THAT WE EVALUATE
AT THAT TIME, THEN IT'S JUST
PART OF THE NATURAL SORT
OF THE, YOU KNOW, PROGRESSION
OF THAT PROJECT.
THIS WOULD ALTER NOT JUST THE
WORK THAT OUR TEAM DOES BUT IT
WOULD AFFECT THE ENTIRE KIND
OF IF IF THERE'S SUPPOSED TO BE
EVALUATED AND IMPLEMENTED THAT
WOULD CHANGE A LOT OF THE
CAPITAL PRIORITIES FOR THE CITY
.
SO THERE'S KIND OF A RIPPLE
EFFECT IN TERMS OF ALL THE WORK
THAT IT WOULD AFFECT EVERYTHING
WOULD HAVE TO SHIFT THE FOCUS
ON THIS WHICH YOU KNOW, IF
THAT'S THE THE PRIORITY THEN
THAT'S THE PRIORITY THE SO IF
WE HAD THIS TIME BOUND BY
TWENTY YEARS, LET'S SAY WE'RE
GOING TO TOUCH EVERY ROAD IN
THE CITY WITHIN THE NEXT TWENTY
YEARS TO REPAVE IT OR RESTART
THE SO THAT WOULD NOT
APPRECIABLY CHANGE THE WORKLOAD
OR THE PRIORITIZATION AT LEAST
THAT'S MY ASSUMPTION THAT
WOULDN'T BE A RADICAL CHANGE.
>> SO IF WE'RE GOING TO DO IT
IN THE NEXT TWO YEARS IT DOES
RADICALLY CHANGE OUR PRIORITIES
AND OUR TIMELINE PIECES WHAT
SOME NUMBER IN BETWEEN TWO AND
20 THAT IS THE RIGHT COMPROMISE
THAT CHANGES OUR PRIORITIES A
LITTLE BIT OR CHANGES THEM AND
CHANGES THEM.
YOU IN A WAY THAT ACCURATELY
REFLECTS HOW MUCH WE ARE
EXPECTING PEOPLE'S LIVES TO BE
SAVED BY THESE ROAD
CONFIGURATIONS.
HOW MANY CRASHES WE'RE
EXPECTING YERVOY THAT THERE'S
SOME NUMBER OTHER THAN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND LET'S CONSIDER
IT
.
YEAH I DON'T HAVE AN ANSWER.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE MAGIC
NUMBER IS.
I MEAN LIKE YOU SAID IT'S
BETWEEN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
TWENTY YEARS I MEAN I
APPRECIATE YOU TRYING TO
ACHIEVE THE VISION ZERO AND WE
ARE COMMITTED TO THAT AND WE'RE
WORKING TOWARDS THAT.
DEBORAH RAYMOND I WONDERED IF
YOU COULD SPEAK TO SOME OF THE
VISION ZERO THINGS THAT WOULD
BE KIND OF KNOCKED OUT OF THE
QUEUE AS A RESULT.
LET'S JUST SAY TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE BECAUSE THAT'S THE ONE
THAT'S BEEN PUT ON THE TABLE
JUST TO MAKE IT SOLID IN
PEOPLE'S MINDS.
>> WELL, LET'S SEE IF WE HAD TO
START EVALUATING ALL ROADS FOR
ROAD CONFIGURATIONS, YOU KNOW,
THAT WOULD OSTENSIBLY REQUIRE A
FAIR AMOUNT OF ENGAGEMENT
BECAUSE THE RESOLUTION THAT WE
REFER TO RESOLUTION EIGHTEEN
DASH TWO SEVENTY FIVE IF MEMORY
SERVES ME CORRECTLY AND I DON'T
HAVE THAT UP IT'S ACTUALLY AN
ENGAGEMENT RESOLUTION AND THE
ENGAGEMENT RESOLUTION TALKS
ABOUT THE DIFFERENT FORMS
OF ENGAGEMENT WE'RE GOING TO DO
ON DIFFERENT TYPES OF PROJECTS
AND THEN ON THIS LAST RESOLVE
CLAUSE OR ONE OF THE RESOLVE
CLAUSES TALKED ABOUT THE SORT
OF ANALYSIS THAT NEED TO BE
PERFORMED AS PART OF A ROAD
RECONFIGURATION OR ROAD DIET.
SO YOU KNOW, IF YOU THINK ABOUT
HIGH PROFILE CODE WORDS YOU
PLYMOUTH STADIUM GOALS JUST A
LOT OF MOVING PARTS TO TRY TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT THAT ROAD
RECONFIGURATION LOOKS LIKE TO
ACHIEVE ALL THE OUTCOMES THAT
WE WANT.
>> YOU KNOW, WE TALKED ABOUT
TRANSIT WITH TRANSIT ROLLS IN
THESE CORRIDORS AND AS I
MENTIONED IN PREVIOUS PLANS, A
LOT OF THE SORT OF YOU KNOW,
MAP CLARIFIED SOME OF THE
LANGUAGE ABOUT BUS RAPID
TRANSIT BUS RAPID TRANSIT ON
CITY ROUTES ARE PROGRAMED UNTIL
TWENTY THIRTY FIVE OR TWENTY
THIRTY FOUR.
SO THE QUESTION IS IF A ROAD
RECONFIGURATION IS UP IN
PLYMOUTH, WHICH IS A SORT
OF HIGH FOCUS CORRIDOR FOR
TRANSIT, WHAT DO WE DO WITH
THAT?
DOES IT TURN INTO YOU KNOW, A
SORT OF REPURPOSED LANE FOR NON
MOTORIZED USE?
DO WE DO SORT OF TRANSIT?
>> THERE'S A LOT
OF CONSIDERATIONS THAT GO INTO
THAT SO I'M JUST TALKING YOU
THROUGH SOME OF THE THOUGHTS
AND PROCESSES AND THINGS WE'LL
HAVE TO SOLVE FOR TECHNICALLY
BUT IN TERMS OF WHAT WOULD KIND
OF BE SWAPPED OUT IT'S PLACE
PRETTY MUCH A LOT OF STUFF,
RIGHT?
I MEAN THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM ROAD RECONFIGURATIONS
ARE ONE OF THE SOLUTIONS THAT'S
IDENTIFIED IN SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM.
BUT WE WERE LOOKING AT
IMPLEMENTING A LOT OF OTHER
THINGS WITH THE SAFE STREETS
FOR ALL GRANT AND TEMPORARY
MAYBE SPEED HUMPS OR THINGS
LIKE ON ON ARTERIALS.
BUT IF OUR FOCUS IS NOW ON THIS
,OUR LIMITED STAFF CAN'T
MANAGE ALL OF THOSE THINGS, WE
CAN BARELY MANAGE WHAT WE HAVE
.
SO THIS THIS IS A BIG LIFT SO I
JUST WANT TO BE HONEST WITH YOU
IT'S A BIG LIFT THAT'S GOING TO
REQUIRE PRETTY MUCH AN ALL
HANDS ON DECK ANALYSIS AND A
LOT OF THE WORK THAT WE HAVE IN
THE QUEUE WE'LL HAVE TO DEFER
THAT.
HE DOESN'T ANSWER YOUR QUESTION
.
NO.
I MEAN I GUESS I'M LOOKING FOR
GUIDANCE ON WHAT IS REALISTIC
AND WHAT WOULD NOT CREATE A LOT
OF CHURN AND PLANS AND I DIDN'T
I DID NOT GET THAT GUIDANCE BUT
I CAN APPRECIATE THAT YOU'RE
NOT GOING TO LIKE THIS ANSWER.
BUT I THINK WHAT WE ARRIVED WAS
THAT SO WE WERE TRYING TO BE
RESPONSIVE TO NOT CREATING A
BUNCH OF CHURN AND THIS IS WHAT
WE ARRIVED AT
.
>> YEP.
A LET'S LOOKING AT MO.
SO I'M I THINK THIS IS SORT
OF BUILDING ON WHAT PETER IS
TALKING ABOUT BUT I'M I'M
WONDERING I THINK I THINK
HAVING A DEADLINE EVEN IF IT'S
NOT SOON IS WOULD BE HELPFUL IF
WE PUT IT I THINK IF WE FOUND A
DEADLINE WHERE THERE'S TIME TO
BUILD THIS WORK INTO THE
VARIOUS KINDS OF WORK PLANS
THAT THAT GET MADE BECAUSE I
KNOW THERE'S PLANNING FOR NEXT
YEAR, THERE'S PLANNING FOR THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS.
LET'S GET THIS IN THOSE PLANS
WHATEVER IS REALISTIC SO THAT
IT DOESN'T DERAIL THE EXISTING
WORK AND THAT IT'S IT BECOMES
PART OF THE MORE MORE PART
OF THE REGULAR RHYTHM SO THAT
WE'RE NOT NECESSARILY DOING ALL
OF THE ROADS AT ONE TIME.
AND I'M CURIOUS ABOUT WHETHER
THAT WAS CONSIDERED AND ROLLED
OUT OR WHETHER THAT MIGHT BE A
PLAUSIBLE COMPROMISE
.
RAYMOND, ANSWER FOR THE I CAN'T
GIVE A DATE ON THE FLY.
I MEAN I HAVE TO LOOK AT OUR
ENTIRE PROGRAM OF PROJECTS AND
ALL THE THINGS THAT WE HAVE
PROGRAMED OVER THE NEXT COUPLE
OF YEARS TO KNOW WHAT HAS TO
MOVE FORWARD, WHAT CAN WE WHAT
WE CAN PROGRAM AND I JUST I
CAN'T DO THAT ON THE FLY AND IN
ALL HONESTY THAT DOESN'T FEEL
LIKE A FAIR REQUEST OF ME.
>> OK,
IT RAYMOND I THINK IT'S
OK FOR YOU TO SAY YOU DON'T
KNOW THE ANSWER RIGHT NOW.
THAT'S TOTALLY FINE.
>> AND IF THE RIGHT WAY TO DO
THIS IS TO POSTPONE FOR A MONTH
UNTIL WE DO KNOW THE ANSWER
THEN I'M OK WITH THAT TOO.
SO I IF YOU DON'T HAVE A SENSE
FOR WHAT THAT NUMBER IS NOW
THAT'S OK.
I GUESS THE OTHER THING I MIGHT
PROPOSE IS THAT WE IS THAT WE
PICK SOME OTHER NUMBER LIKE
FIVE OR SIX YEARS OR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT.
THERE'S TWO WAYS WE COULD DO
IT.
WE COULD POSTPONE IN MY OPINION
TWO WAYS WE COULD DO POSTPONE
UNTIL WE GET AN ASSESSMENT ON
WHAT THE CORRECT NUMBER SHOULD
BE OR WE SHOULD PICK SOMETHING
THIS GROUP IS COMFORTABLE WITH
TWENTY TWENTY EIGHT FIVE YEARS
DHARMA YOU'RE THE ONE THAT'S
GOING TO BE TAKING THIS TO
COUNCIL.
I DON'T KNOW HOW YOU FEEL ABOUT
POSTPONEMENT AND OR YOU KNOW,
THROWING THROWING A NUMBER OUT
THERE THAT PEOPLE CAN VOTE YES
ON IF IF IT'S AMENDED ASKING ME
IF I'M COMFORTABLE THROWING A
NO NO NOT REALLY AND AS A
POSTPONEMENT I MEAN WE'VE BEEN
WORKING ON THIS A LONG TIME.
I DON'T THINK A MONTH MAKES A
FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCE.
I ALSO BUT I ALSO DON'T KNOW IF
A MONTH IS EVEN I DON'T KNOW IF
THIS REQUEST IS ACTUALLY A
REASONABLE AGREEMENT TO DO IN
ONE MONTH.
SO I'M I DON'T KNOW EVEN IF
YOU'VE GOT THOUGHTS IF YOU WANT
US TO COME BACK WITH A DATE
NEXT MONTH, WE CAN TRY TO DO
THAT.
BUT I THINK YOU KNOW WHAT I AM
I MEAN I'M JUST TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW ARE WE YOU KNOW,
YOU TELL ME I WANT YOU TO BRING
SOMETHING BACK.
WE'LL BRING SOME BACK
.
I HAVE I HAVE ANOTHER
COMPROMISE PROPOSAL BECAUSE
NOTHING WE DO AT SEA IS BINDING
AND SO WE CAN RECOMMEND THAT
WHEN COUNCIL PASSES A
RESOLUTION THEY PUT A DEADLINE
ON IT AND WE DON'T HAVE TO SAY
WHAT IT IS AND THAT WOULD GIVE
AS MUCH TIME AS IT'S GOING TO
TAKE BETWEEN NOW AND WHEN THIS
RESOLUTION COMES TO COUNCIL TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT A REASONABLE
DEADLINE IS AND I DON'T KNOW IF
THAT CREATES ENOUGH WIGGLE ROOM
TO TO AND TO PUT ON A DEADLINE
THAT COULD BE IT DOESN'T HAVE
TO BE A DEADLINE THAT WOULD
OPEN UP THAT WOULD MAKE SURE
THAT IT CAN FIT INTO THE WORK
PLAN AS AS IT CURRENTLY EXISTS.
I GUESS.
AND WE JUST RECOMMEND THAT
THERE BE A DEADLINE AND WE
DON'T RECOMMEND WHAT THAT
DEADLINE IS.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT GETS OUT
YOUR CONCERNS.
IT MIGHT I GUESS I WOULD ALSO
LIKE TO OBSERVE THAT THE
LANGUAGE SAYS IT'S NOT LIKE
ANYBODY'S GOING TO GET FIRED IF
WE DON'T MEET OUR GOAL.
>> RIGHT.
SO WE I THINK WE DO NEED TO BE
TIME BOUND.
WE NEED TO HAVE A GOAL THAT
WE'RE WORKING TOWARDS AND THAT
BEFORE THIS THE OTHER THING
I'LL OBSERVE IS THAT COUNCIL
COULD CHANGE THAT GOAL LATER ON
WITH ANOTHER WITH ANOTHER
RESOLUTION THAT THEY WANTED.
YOU ALL HAD TO
WOULD YOU BE
PROPOSING THAT THE WORK AT THE
TIME BY NATURE OF THIS APPLY TO
THE WORK AND THE COMPLETION
OF RECONFIGURATION OR WOULD IT
APPLY JUST TO ANY PRELIMINARY
EVALUATION PROCESS WHERE CITY
STAFF SAYS YEAH, WE THINK THIS
ROAD SHOULD SHOULD BE ELIGIBLE
FOR THE WORK AT SOME POINT IN
THE FUTURE?
IS IT THE WORK AND THE ACTUAL
END OF THE PROJECT OR JUST AN
EVALUATION THAT COULD BE AT
KIND STATS DISCRETION?
>> IS THAT DIRECTED TO ME?
YEAH.
ANY YEAH WELL THE WAY I BY THE
WAY I'VE WRITTEN IT SAYS WITH
THE GOAL OF RECONFIGURING THAT
JULIE I JUST WANT TO MAKE A
CASE FOR FLEXIBILITY NOT BEING
SO BAD YOU KNOW WE DON'T WE
DON'T WANT TO SET A GOAL LIKE
REALLY FOCUS ON THIS AND THEN
SIX MONTHS LATER THERE IS
SOMETHING ELSE THAT WE ALSO
THINK THEY REALLY WANT IF WE
REALLY WANT THEM TO FOCUS AND
WE'VE ALREADY TOLD THEM TO
FOCUS ON THIS OTHER THING AND
THAT'S NOT FAIR.
>> SO I DON'T MIND GOALS.
I UNDERSTAND THE GOALS AREN'T
SET IN STONE BUT I JUST WANT TO
PUT A CASE OUT THERE FOR
FLEXIBILITY, ABILITY AND
FLEXIBILITY.
I THINK ALSO GOOD DERMO BECAUSE
I'D ALSO LIKE US TO CONSIDER
WHAT THE REAL GOAL IS AND I
THINK THE GOAL IS MODE SHIFT.
YOU KNOW THE BIG SUSTAINABILITY
GOAL OF MODE SHIFT AND IT'S
ZERO DEATHS ON OUR ROADS BY
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE THOSE ARE
THE GOALS AND THEN ALL OF THESE
THINGS ARE TOOLS.
THIS IS A VERY IMPORTANT TOOL
AND I THINK WE WANT TO PUSH AND
AND MAKE CLEAR POLICY BECAUSE
IT'S SO EFFECTIVE AND IT CAN BE
ARGUABLY DONE CHEAPLY MAYBE WE
HAVE LAYERS THAT MAKE IT NOT SO
CHEAP BUT YOU KNOW, I HAD
PREFERRED THE FOCUS ON THE
OTHER GOALS AND THE FACT THAT
WE HAVE MULTIPLE WAYS THAT
WE'RE GOING ABOUT IT AND I
DON'T WANT TO CUT OFF OUR NOSE
TO SPITE OUR FACE BY PUSHING A
BUNCH OF OTHER STUFF THAT'S
AIMED AT THE SAME SAME THING MY
MY PART I COULD GET BEHIND
SOMETHING A STATEMENT WHERE WE
PUT A TIME OR SOMETHING TIME
AROUND ABOUT AN EVALUATION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS.
BUT FOR REASONS THAT I THINK
DHARMA AND JULIE JUST SAID I
DON'T KNOW THAT I COULD GET
BEHIND EVEN IF WE CALL IT A
GOAL A TIME DOWN OF COMPLETING
PROJECTS SEEMS LIKE THERE'S
JUST TOO MUCH UP IN THE AIR TO
DICTATE PROJECT SHOVEL IN THE
GROUND KIND OF SCHEDULE BUT IF
IF THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT HOW
WE CAN DIRECT STAFF OR ASK
COUNCIL TO DIRECT STAFF TO AT
LEAST PERFORM PRELIMINARY
EVALUATION, THEN ALL OF THESE
ROADS AND GIVE A SENSE OF WHICH
ONES STAFF THINGS COULD AND
SHOULD RECEIVE RECONFIGURATION
SO THAT IT'S EASIER TO PLAN FOR
THOSE IN THE FUTURE AND TO GET
THEM INTO THE SIPI.
MAYBE THAT'S SOMETHING I DON'T
KNOW AT OTHER THOUGHTS
THE SO
ANOTHER WAY TO FRAME IT WOULD
BE TO THAT A ROAD HAS TO BE
EVALUATED BEFORE A BEFORE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS OR SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM IS COMPLETED
FOR THEM.
>> RIGHT.
THE NEXT TIME WE TOUCH IT WE'RE
GOING TO DO THIS WOULD BE
ANOTHER WAY TO SAY IT THE WAY I
SEE IT NOW IS THE WAY I SEE IT
NOW IS WE ARE SUPPOSED TO USE
THE SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
AND THE RESURFACING AND
RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM TO
EVALUATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS.
THAT'S NOT THE SAME TO ME IS
SAYING THAT EVERY TIME WE
RESTART A ROAD OR WE
RECONSTRUCT A ROAD WE ARE GOING
TO EVALUATE IT LIKE LET'S NOT
TOUCH ANOTHER ROAD WITHOUT
EVALUATING NEXT TIME WE TOUCH
IT WE'RE GOING TO EVALUATE AND
I GUESS I DON'T SEE THAT HERE
.
>> YES, SIR.
I THINK WHAT YOU SAID IS
EXACTLY WHAT WE DID INTEND AND
RIGHT.
SO NOT REALLY SURE WHAT THE
DISCONNECT IS THEN I GUESS I'D
WONDER COULD OR IF A MAN CAN
CONFIRM I MEAN THAT'S WHAT I
UNDERSTOOD BUT WE DID WRITE IT
LIKE THAT
.
>> WELL, THAT'S MY
UNDERSTANDING OF THE INTENT
OF THAT FIRST RESOLVE CLAUSE IS
THAT ANY TIME WE TOUCH THE ROAD
THAT WE CONFIGURATION IS
SOMETHING WE'RE SUPPOSED TO
LOOK AT BUT MAYBE A
CLARIFICATION MAYBE WHAT PETE
IS GETTING AT IS LET'S SAY WE
WERE GOING TO PROPOSE SPEED
HUMPS AND THIS IS HYPOTHETICAL
TO ANYBODY WATCHING THIS IS NOT
A REAL EXERCISE AND THAT'S WHAT
WE WERE GOING TO ADVANCE AS
KIND OF SPEED MANAGEMENT
VERSION 1.0.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF WE WOULD
HAVE STARTED FROM A POSITION
OF NECESSARILY DOING A FULL
ROAD DIET ANALYSIS.
MAYBE WE WOULD HAVE MAYBE WE
WOULDN'T HAVE.
SO YEAH, IT'S IT I MEAN THE
SEQUENCING, THE WORK AND
EVERYTHING AND I'M JUST
STRUGGLING A LITTLE BIT WITH
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE
TACKLE THE WORK NOW AND WHAT
WHAT'S THE DRIVING FORCE BEHIND
WHAT IT IS WE'RE TRYING TO DO.
THE
SO DRAMATIC POINTS OF USE
THE SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
AND THE RESURFACING
RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM TO
EVALUATE OPPORTUNITIES THAT
DOESN'T SAY TO EVALUATE EVERY
ROAD THAT IS PART OF THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND THE
RESURFACING RECONSTRUCTION.
AND WE JUST SAY THAT CAN WE
JUST SAY EXPLICITLY THE
EXPECTATION IS THAT EVERY ROAD
THAT GOES THROUGH THESE TWO
PROGRAMS AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
WILL BE EVALUATED THAT'S
EXPLICITLY
AND THE WAY I READ
IT AFTER WE SUBMIT YOUR
DIRECTED TO USE THOSE TWO
PROGRAMS TO EVALUATE
OPPORTUNITIES WELL AFTER
EVALUATED TWO OPPORTUNITIES I'M
SATISFIED WITH TENURE.
I'VE EVALUATED OPPORTUNITIES
THAT'S NOT THE SAME AS SAYING
USE THESE AND APPLY IT TO EVERY
SINGLE ROAD THAT IS IN THAT IN
THAT IN THOSE TWO PROGRAMS
I'M
STRUGGLING WITH WITH THE WORD
SMITHING ON THIS.
I DO HAVE PROPOSED IF YOU CAN
GET SOME WORDS LET'S THAT'S GOT
TO START MOVING YOUR I
UNDERSTAND THE INTENT TO BE
WHAT DHARMA AND RAYMOND JUST
SPECIFIED THAT IF IT'S NOT
CLEAR THAT THAT IS THE INTENT
MAYBE COME UP WITH A DIFFERENT
WAY OF WORDING THOSE THE TWO
EVALUATE OPPORTUNITIES SECTION
THESE ARE SOMETHING ON TOP THAT
WOULD MAKE IT NOW I GUESS I WAS
FOCUSED ON GIVING IT A DEADLINE
OR GIVING THE DATE FOR OUR GOAL
SO I DON'T HAVE LANGUAGE WITHIN
IT.
>> THAT'S SOMETHING IN THE
TRANSLATION TO CITY COUNCIL
MAYBE THAT CAN BE MADE MORE
CLEAR THE DIRECTION I DON'T
KNOW IF WE DON'T I JUST DON'T
WANT TO DELAY THIS FOR THAT
PURPOSE.
YOU KNOW, TO MAYBE MORE CLEARLY
EXPLICITLY STATE WHAT STAFF AND
DHARMA UNDERSTAND TO BE TO BE
THE INTENT DERMO LIKE I WILL
JUST BRING FORWARD WHAT
INFORMATION PASSES BUT
CERTAINLY I WILL BE GOING TO
THAT MEETING HAVING LISTENED TO
ALL OF THE FEEDBACK AND CHANGES
CAN BE PROPOSED AT THE TABLE.
SO I APPRECIATE OK IS ANOTHER
AVENUE RIGHT.
I I PROBABLY WOULDN'T DO A LOT
OF WORDS ANYTHING PRIOR TO
TAKING IT EXCEPT FOR THE
FRIENDLY MOMENTS WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT.
I WOULD CARRY IT FORWARD AS WE
DO IN THIS MEETING.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER AMENDMENTS
PROPOSED FOR THIS NOT I'D LIKE
TO MAYBE GET A VOTE ON THIS
UNLESS THERE ARE NO MOTIONS TO
TO DELAY IT TO NEXT MONTH'S
MEETING.
OK, SIGNA IN MOTION TO
RECOMMEND APPROVAL OF THE
RESOLUTION TO ACCELERATE SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS ON MULTI-LINE
ROADS SO MOVED AND SECONDED BY
JULIE ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE
SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR HAND I
YEAH ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE
SAY NO OR RAISE YOUR HAND THE
THE MOTION PASSES SO I THINK
WE'RE ALL LOOKING FORWARD TO
SEEING THIS AT THE NEXT OR A
NEAR COUNCIL MEETING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
BRINGING THIS TO OUR FOR ALL
THE DISCUSSION.
>> I THINK EVERYBODY RIGHT.
NEXT UP INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION SECTION PROGRAM TO
EDUCATE ALL CYCLISTS
PRESENTATIONS.
WE'RE JOINED THIS EVENING BY
JONATHAN WATERMAN AND OTHER
MEMBERS OF PEAK, THE PROGRAM TO
EDUCATE ALL CYCLISTS JONATHAN
OR IS YOURS TO TELL US WHAT
ORGANIZATION PLEASE?
EXCELLENT.
I'VE BEEN UNMUTED GIVE YOU A
THUMBS SOMEBODY SO I KNOW YOU
HAVE A GOOD SUPERCOOL ALL GUYS
QUICK INTRODUCTION
OF INDIVIDUALS AROUND THE ROOM
SITTING HERE WITH THE PIZZA
PROGRAM THAT'S DEDICATED TO
EMPOWER INDIVIDUALS ACTIVE
MODES OF TRANSPORT AND BUSSES
AND WALKING YOU DISCUSSION
OF ROAD DIET JUST FITS RIGHT IN
OUR WHEELHOUSE AND WHAT WE
BELIEVE AND PLEASE KEEP THAT
GREAT WORK ON THAT AND THANK
YOU FOR PASSING THAT MEASURE.
>> MCKEYLA, WOULD YOU LIKE TO
INTRODUCE YOURSELF?
YES, I IN A TIME I HAVE THREE
DISABILITIES.
I HAVE THAT SCHEDULE TO APPEAL
IN READING MATH.
IT'S HARD FOR ME AND I THAT HE
WOULD LAUGH AND THEN I I HAVE
DECIDED AND SO WE SAY COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT THEN IS READING AND
WRITING IS TOUGH.
>> YES IT IS A SOLID TIME.
EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR COMING
BACK FOR YOUR STORY AND WE HAVE
AN IS ON NINETY EIGHT YEAR I
HAVE I HAVE GALKAYO AND THIS IS
YOUR FIRST TIME EVER DOING THIS
ISN'T IT.
ALL RIGHT GREAT THANK YOU
SHALIKA COMING HERE AND BEING
ONE OF OUR ROOKIES TO MY LEFT
HERE WE HAVE HIGHWAYS AVERY AND
I ARE DOWN SYNDROME DUFLOT
AUTISM AND INTERCUTTING WHEN I
SEE YOU MOVING A LOT AND
SHAKING THERE IS THAT OK?
YES.
DOES THAT MEAN YOU CAN'T YOU'RE
A BIG GUY, RIGHT?
AND YOU'RE HAPPY THOUGH, RIGHT?
AND THEN JUST KIND OF YOU KNOW,
NORMAL MOTIONS AND STUFF LIKE
THAT.
YEAH.
SOMETIMES PEOPLE ARE AFRAID
OF YOU BECAUSE WHEN THEY KNOW
THAT YOU'RE HAPPY AND YOU'RE
NOT IN A GOOD MOOD BUT YOU MOVE
A LOT AND THAT'S WITH
DISABILITIES.
>> YEAH WE HAVE GERSTMANN AND
SOON WE KEEP RIGHT.
AND DO YOU HAVE A DISABILITY
AND YOU AND WHAT IS IT WE
REALLY TOUGH AND I CALL THAT A
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT RIGHT
EXCELLENT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND SINCE I'M FROM MICHIGAN ALL
FULL ME THANK YOU.
>> AND GUYS, WE CAN TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT OUR STORY AND
THAT YOU KNOW, WE'RE HERE TO
SHARE WHAT IT TAKES AND WHAT
THE ROADS ARE.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS WE TALK
ABOUT ARE ROADS.
>> WE WE BASICALLY LOOK AT THE
ROAD IT'S EITHER MEANS OR WHAT
I MEAN OR NICE AND IT'S REALLY
PRETTY SIMPLE HOW WE LOCATED
AND WE GET FEELINGS OF THAT AND
WE HAVE STORIES OF WHAT HAS
HAPPENED TO US PERSONALLY ON
THESE ROADS BUT ALSO WHAT MAKES
A MEAN ROAD MAKES A NICE ROAD
AND IT SOUNDS LIKE CITY COUNCIL
THERE ARE THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEES THERE THAN I EVER
WAS TRYING TO MAKE A ROAD.
>> I MEAN ARE NICE, RIGHT?
AND SO WHAT WE CAN DO BETTER
ALSO HOPEFULLY WE'LL GET
THROUGH THIS.
>> WE WERE A QUICK PLUG IN.
SO I MEAN AS WE ARE TALKING
ABOUT WE RIGHT WHEN YOU GUYS
THINK OF FOURTH STREET AND
SOUTHFIELD, THAT INTERSECTION
IS THAT MEAN OR NICE MEAN DO
YOU THINK IT'S MINGI OK SO WHEN
YOU SAY MEAN WHAT DO YOU MEAN
BY MEAN ROAD WHAT MAKES A ROAD
ME YOU SAID THE CARS GO TOO
FAST YOU GUYS GOT TO SPEAK UP
YOU GUYS HAVE ALL THE RIGHT
ANSWERS.
>> I MEAN BOLD AND PROUD MAKES
YOU YOUR SPIRIDON HAROLDS.
>> YES THAT'S SOMETHING MIGROS
GOT SCARED THAT'S ONE THING WE
NEED TO TALK ABOUT A LOT IS IF
YOU'RE SCARED OF A ROAD WE DO
NOT WANT TO LIVE IN A SOCIETY
THAT WE ARE SCARED TO WALK IN.
WE DO NOT WANT TO LIVE IN A
PLACE WE'RE SCARED TO RIDE AND
IF WE CAN MAKE IT SAFE FOR US
TO BIKE AND RIDE WE CAN MAKE IT
SAFE FOR EVERYBODY RIGHT.
YOU SHOULD NOT BE SCARED TO
WALK TO THE STORE AND WE'RE
LIVING IN A WORLD WHERE PEOPLE
ARE SCARED TO WALK.
>> IF YOU EVER BEEN AFRAID TO
WALK RIDE YOUR BIKE SHOP GIVE
ME TOO MANY DRUGS AND THEY GO
TOO FAST AND TOO FAST.
>> YEAH.
SO WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT IT.
SEAN, YOU LIVE IN A VERY YOU
YOU LIVE IN CANTON RIGHT OFF
OF MICHIGAN HAVE AN HEGGARTY
THAT'S NOT REALLY A BUSY PLACE
OF HOW DO YOU GET TO WORK
WHEN
YOU GO WITH OK WHEN YOU GO TO
THE GAS STATION HOW DID YOU GET
THERE?
>> I'M ALWAYS ON YOUR BIKE.
>> YOU RODE YOUR BIKE DOWN THE
ROAD AND SOMETHING SPECIAL
HAPPENED WHILE YOU'RE WORKING
THERE.
>> RIGHT.
WHAT DID THEY DO YOU THE WELL
DO YOU REMEMBER THE BIKE PATH.
YES I WENT UNDER TWO SEVENTY
FIVE YEAH IT WASN'T A GREAT
DAY.
YEAH BECAUSE NOW WHAT COULD YOU
COULD GO RIGHT DIRECTLY TO WORK
RIGHT.
YEAH.
DIDN'T WORRY ABOUT ALL THOSE
CARS IN MICHIGAN HAVE IT MADE A
REALLY NICE ROAD FOR YOU IN
YOUR STATE SEPARATED FROM CARS
AND YOUR RIGHTS TO WORK.
>> HAVE YOU EVER BEEN HURT.
ONE WANTS TO FOR YOU COMING
HOME FROM WORK.
>> WHAT HAPPENED HERE.
YOU CAN'T DO ANYTHING TO GET A
GREEN LIGHT.
A CAR DID NOT SEE YOU.
HE HIT YOU.
WHOSE FAULT WAS IT?
IS THERE THE DRIVER'S FAULT?
DID HE FEEL BAD?
HE DID.
WHAT DID HE DO AND THAT WAS
BEFORE I REALLY DIDN'T TAKE
THEM.
THEY SAID DON'T MAKE THIS A BIG
OFFENSE.
THE POLICE WERE KIND OF LET THE
KIND OF LET HIM GO ON HIS WAY
BUT HE FELT SO BAD AND BUT WHAT
IF A BIKE ADEBIYI A NEW
CANADELL MOUNTAIN BIKE?
YEAH.
WELL THAT'S A PRETTY FANCY BIKE
ISN'T IT?
IS THAT YOUR FAVORITE BIKE RIDE
RIGHT NOW?
>> RIGHT NOW.
>> WHAT'S YOUR FAVORITE BIKE TO
RIDE DOWN IN THE NEW ONE?
WHO BUILT THAT NEW BIKE?
I DID.
YOU DID YOU SEE THE WHEELS
BEHIND IT?
YOU BUILT THAT BIKE AND WHAT
DOES IT HAVE TO MAKE IT BETTER
FOR YOU LIKE THE DISC BRAKES ON
IT AND SO YOU RIDE YOUR BIKE,
YOUR BIKE IF YOU GO TO THE
YOU'D LIKE TO GO TO THE BURGER
KING, YOU TAKE THE BIKE TO
BURBANK.
IS THAT BIKE IS HOW YOU GET
AROUND.
YEAH.
THAT MAKES YOU INDEPENDENT.
>> THAT'S GREAT.
SO TALKING ABOUT STORIES
OF TRAVEL SEPARATION THAT HALF
MADE HIS LIFE SAFER AND MORE
INDEPENDENT AND YOU ARE PART
OF THAT YOU TALKED ABOUT IT.
YOU SHARED ABOUT IT AND SO THE
CITY MANAGER HAS BEEN DOING
SOME PRETTY COOL THINGS WITH
SEPARATION OF CYCLISTS AND
MOTOR VEHICLES TO MAKE IT
SAFER.
>> RIDING SHOULDN'T JUST BE
DONE BY CYCLISTS THAT ARE ROAD
WARRIORS MYSELF WAS LESS
OF LESS CONCERNED ABOUT RIDING
ON THE ROAD.
SHOULDN'T THE ONLY PERSON ABLE
TO DRIVE
?
>> I THINK ALSO ANOTHER GREAT
STORY WE HAVE IS TERRIA TO
RIYAZ, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT YOU.
>> I'D LIKE TO BRAG A LITTLE
BIT BUT IS THAT OK?
DO YOU SIT ON ANY COMMITTEES?
>> THE RTC IS THE ADVISORY
COMMITTEE SO THAT MEANS YOU
VOTE FOR STUFF?
YEAH, AND YOU AND I BOTH SIT ON
THE COMMITTEE RIGHT.
IT TOOK A LITTLE TIME TO GET
USED TO THAT, DIDN'T IT?
DO YOU REMEMBER THOSE FIRST
COUPLE OF MEETINGS YOU ALWAYS
LOOKED AT ME RIGHT BEFORE YOU
VOTED ONE TO SEE WHAT I THOUGHT
AND NOW WHAT DO WE DO?
WHO MAKES YOUR CHOICES?
AND IF WE DON'T AGREE AND WE
VOTE DIFFERENTLY, DO I GET MAD
AT YOU NOW IT'S YOUR CHOICE AND
I WANT YOU TO VOTE.
WE DON'T VOTE ON WHAT I THINK
YOU THE BIG THING WE HAVE IS WE
GET CAUGHT SO OFTEN WITH
BRAINIAC'S MAKING OUR DECISIONS
AND SORRY IF WE OFFEND PEOPLE
THERE BUT THERE ARE A LOT
OF BRAINIACS, RIGHT?
A LOT OF THE DISCUSSIONS WE
HEARD TODAY SOUNDED LIKE WHAT
BRAINIAC'S OR AND WE UNDERSTAND
THE IMPORTANCE OF THAT AND WE
APPLAUD YOU BEING HERE.
BUT WHEN IT COMES RIGHT DOWN TO
IT, IS THIS ROAD GOING TO BE
NICER OR MEANER?
WHAT WE DECIDE TO DO AND THAT'S
WHAT WE WANT WE WANT PLACES
WHERE WE ARE NOT AFRAID TO RIDE
INTO ONE TREE OR SOMETHING
HAPPEN TO YOU TO WALK TO WHERE
YOU WORKING AT BURGER KING.
>> RIGHT.
WELL, WHAT HAPPENED TO SO
YOU'RE TELLING ME YOU LEFT
EARLY IN THE MORNING ON TIME.
>> YOU WALK IN WHAT NUMBER WAS
IT GOING TO YOU'RE GOING TO GET
ON THE ONE TWENTY FIVE YOU'RE
COMING DOWN ALL SAID WHAT DO
YOU SEE IN FRONT OF YOU THE BIG
OLD PUDDLE OF WATER FLOODED AND
THEN WHO HAD A DETOUR BECAUSE
THE CARS WHAT ABOUT PEDESTRIAN
NO DETOUR.
SO YOU DIDN'T KNOW HOW TO GET
TO WHERE THE NEXT BUS STOP.
SO WHAT DID YOU HAVE TO DO WITH
WORK THEN MAKE YOUR BOSS HAPPY?
>> NO.
AND WERE YOU HAPPY?
NO DETOURS ESPECIALLY FOR
PEDESTRIANS AND ACCESSIBLE
DETOURS OR SOMETHING WE REALLY,
REALLY MISSED DURING
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
EVERYTHING WHENEVER WE'RE
PUTTING A DETOUR IN A ROAD WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT THE
PEDESTRIANS THAT NEED TO GET
FROM ONE PLACE TO ANOTHER ALSO
I REMEMBER YOU TAKING THAT ONE
TWENTY FIVE AT NIGHT AND I KIND
OF LEARNED TO ROAD THAT NIGHT
WITH YOU AND WE DID AND YOU HAD
TO GO UNDER THAT BRIDGE AND
THAT WAS A TRAIN BRIDGE.
RIGHT.
WHAT WAS THE PROBLEM WITH THAT
BRIDGE.
IT WAS DARK AND THERE'S NO
LIGHTS DIDN'T MAKE YOU KIND
OF HERE.
DID YOU EVER RUN WOULD YOU DO
YOU DID YOU EVER THINK PEOPLE
WERE BEHIND YOU?
>> AND I CAN TELL YOU I WAS
SCARED WALKING DOWN THERE.
>> THERE WAS TIMES I WAS
LOOKING AROUND THINKING WHAT'S
GOING ON BECAUSE IT WAS SO DARK
AND YOU COMING HOME AT NIGHT
AND ALL YOU WANTED TO DO WAS BE
ABLE TO GET TO YOUR JOB AND TO
GET HOME NICE.
>> KEEP UP THE WORK YOU'RE
DOING THERE.
WE SHOULD NOT BE SCARED TO WALK
HOME.
WE SHOULD NOT BE SCARED TO BE
WALKING IN OUR COMMUNITY.
>> WE JUST LOST OUR OUR OVER
OVERHEAD LIKE THEIR GUYS.
>> SO WE'RE GOING TO BE A
DARKER CITY.
>> WE CAN STILL SEE IT JUST
FINE.
OK, GOOD.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO AS YOU SAID TALKING ABOUT
THESE STORIES, THIS IS A LOT
OF THE STUFF THAT YOU GUYS
SHARE HERE, RIGHT?
LIGHTING SAFETY AND STUFF LIKE
THAT.
WE'RE GOING TO GO BACK TO THE
STAGE OF WHAT MAKES A MEAN ROAD
AND WHAT DOES IT WHO DOES RAISE
YOUR HAND?
WHO RIDES A BIKE HERE IT HAS
DONE I PUT MY THAT'S IT IS OUR
TWO MILES ON THE ROAD.
>> YES.
YES.
WHEN WE'RE RIDING TWO MILE LOOP
WE TALK ABOUT SOME THINGS WE
HAVE SOME RESPONSIBILITY WHEN
WE RIDE WHAT DO WE NEED TO BE
RESECTABLE?
>> WE'VE GOT A PREDICTABLE WHEN
WE'RE RIDING BIKES WE NEED TO
BE PREDICTABLE.
>> THE CARS NEED TO KNOW WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO.
WHAT DOES PREDICTABLE LOOK LIKE
?
LET'S BE SERIOUS, RIGHT?
YEAH, YOU'RE RIGHT.
WHAT IN A STRAIGHT LINE YOU
HOLD A STRAIGHT LINE.
>> WE'RE BE FOCUSED.
WE STOP WHAT THAT STOP SIGNS
FOR IN TIME WHEN YOU'RE
SWERVING WHAT HAPPENS?
>> THE CAR DOESN'T KNOW WHAT
YOU'RE DOING RIGHT.
SO WE NEED TO BE PREDICTABLE
WHEN WE'RE RIDING ON THAT ROAD
AND WE'RE SHARING IT WITH THE
CARS WHICH IS A NEIGHBORHOOD
ROAD BEHIND OUR BUILDING.
RIGHT.
IT'S A TWO MILE LOOP.
WE'RE TALKING LINCOLN PARK, AN
AREA THAT MAY NOT BE KNOWN IS
REALLY WELL KNOWN FOR BIKE
ACCESSIBILITY BUT IS SAFE.
>> YEAH.
DO WE HAVE A LOT OF FRIENDS IN
A WAY THAT LETS PEOPLE TALK TO
US AND WE RIDE THERE IN THAT
COMMUNITY NOW LET'S CHANGE THE
ROUTE A LITTLE BIT.
LET'S MOVE OVER HERE TO FORT
STREET.
WHO WANTS TO RIDE THE COME
FORWARD SPEED?
>> RAISE YOUR HANDS WACKO'S NO
.
WHY THAT THING?
IT'S NOT SAFE.
NO, NOT IS IT IS A NICE ROAD
OUR MAIN ROAD TO RIGHT ON MOOD.
>> WHAT MAKES IT MEAN FOR CARS
ARE TOO FAST AND SOMETIMES
LOADS TO ACTUALLY GET CLOSE.
YEAH I KNOW WE GET CAR AND THEN
WE CALL UP A PEOPLE AND SO I
CAN HONK SO WE GOT CUT OFF BY A
TRUCK AND A RIDE.
>> YEAH AND SO IT WAS A IT WAS
A COMPANY'S TRUCK AND WHAT WERE
WE ABLE TO DO.
WE CALL THE COMPANY AND SAID
HEY YOU GUYS THIS IS WHAT
HAPPENED.
THEY PASSED WELL WITHIN THREE
FEET OF US THEY HONK THE HORN.
>> THEY WERE BEING RUDE WEREN'T
ME.
YEAH THEY'RE BEING MEAN THEY'RE
MEAN DRIVERS AND WE TALK ABOUT
THAT MEAN OR LIKE WE WANT
PLACES TO BE MEAN OR YOU WANT
TO BE NICE AND IT'S REALLY
SIMPLE GUYS AND IN A LOT OF AND
LOOKING AT THE CARS THAT ARE
DRIVING TOO FAST ARE WHAT WHEN
A ROAD HAS TOO MANY CARS AND
THEY'RE ALL RACING THERE IT'S
SO SELFISH.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN NOT CARING ABOUT NOT
PAYING ATTENTION.
>> TERRIA YOU HAVE A COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT.
I HEARD YOU'RE TEACHING
INDIVIDUALS HOW TO USE THE
SMART ONES.
>> YOU'RE GOING INTO A SCHOOL
AND WORK WITH OTHER KIDS WITH
DISABILITIES.
THEY LOOK UP TO YOU.
THEY DO AND SO WHEN WE'RE DOING
THAT INSTRUCTION AND YOU'RE
WORKING OUT HERE, WHAT MAKES
YOU AFRAID OF YOUR STUDENTS AND
KIND OF SCARES YOU?
>> YOU DON'T WANT THEM TO GET
HURT THAT THE CAR IS HITTING
THEM.
>> YEAH, AND THERE'S ONE THING
WHEN WE START TALKING ABOUT
INTERSECTIONS RIGHT.
>> WHAT MAKES YOU FEEL SAFER AT
INTERSECTIONS CROSSWALK SIGN
YET SIGNALIZATION IS REALLY
IMPORTANT, ISN'T IT?
>> AND WE LIKE THAT TO KNOW
WHEN IT'S SAFE TO GO.
AND YOU KNOW IN ANN ARBOR IF
THEY HAVE A CROSSWALK AND WHAT
DOES THE CROSSWALK LOOK LIKE?
>> HOW MANY LINES TO TWO LINES
AND SOMETIMES IT HAD TO STUFF
LIKE THAT AND THAT WILL HAVE TO
APPLY A LOT MORE LINES AND THEN
BEFORE THE CROSSWALK STARTS
WHAT IS THERE LIKE A WARNING
PLATE AND THAT'S OUR WORD
OF WARNING.
>> IT TELLS US WHERE TO STAND.
IT HELPS WHO DOES IT HELP THE
TYPE OF PEOPLE LIKE BLIND
PEOPLE TO HELP BLIND PEOPLE
FROM SOME WELL, WHEELCHAIR
WHEELCHAIRS.
>> YEAH, BECAUSE THEY HAD TO
PUT THAT IN THERE BECAUSE
OF THE RAMPS.
>> RIGHT.
AND WE CALL THE MORNING PLATES
YOU KNOW, THE BRAINIAC'S CALL
TRUNCATED IS SUNWARD.
>> YEAH.
SO THEY'RE THEY CALLED IT AND
THEY SOLVED IT BUT IT'S A
WARNING PLATE AND IT HELPS
INDIVIDUALS WITH IMPAIRMENTS IN
AUTISM WHERE TO STAND AND WE
STAND BEHIND THAT.
THERE'S A GOOD CHANCE THOSE
KAHRIZAK RIGHT THOSE MAY NOT
ALWAYS WHAT HAPPENS OUT HERE
UNSELD FIELD IN 42ND STREET AND
THAT CORNER THEY DO THEY ALWAYS
WHEN YOU SAY IT'S LIKE A
RACETRACK, ISN'T IT LONGEVITY
LAW.
CAREFUL WHEN YOU'RE OUT OF THE
CAR NOT GET RUN OVER AND YOU
KILL RIGHT?
YOU GET KILLED AND I DON'T WANT
TO BE KILLED.
THAT ONE HIT IT.
>> DO YOU WANT TO KILL ME?
>> ME?
NOT IF YOU DO.
I DON'T BLAME YOU AT ALL.
SO WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THIS THESE CARS DON'T REALLY
YIELD THE IS RED THEY TURN
RIGHT ON RED AND WHAT HAPPENS
WE'RE TRYING TO CROSS.
>> I'VE SEEN YOU STICK YOUR
HAND UP TO STOP.
>> WHO ELSE HAVE YOU SEEN STOP
THE CARS.
>> OH YEAH THAT'S THE THIRD ONE
IS WHAT I UNDERSTAND WHY THE
CALIFORNIA LANE SHUT DOWN.
>> YEAH WE'VE YOU'VE SEEN STEPH
STEP AND STOP CARS.
>> RIGHT.
LET'S TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
OUR RELATION WITH CARS.
>> RIGHT.
CALZADO YOU HAVE TO BE MEAN
PEOPLE DRIVING CARS DON'T HAVE
TO BE MEAN TO US.
>> WHAT MAKES SOMEONE NICE IN A
CAR?
>> WHAT'S IT TO YOU?
I HAVE EYE CONTACT IS
EVERYTHING CAN IN THE WAY.
>> YEAH.
SO WE'RE CROSSING A STREET AND
WE GET EYE CONTACT AND WAIT DO
WE FEEL SAFE.
>> YEAH GUYS IF SOMEBODY IS
LOOKING DOWN IN THEIR LAP ARE
YOU FEELING SAFE TO CROSS THE
STREET WHILE THEY'RE NOT PAYING
ATTENTION THEY'RE LOOKING AT
THEIR PHONE AND THAT'S SCARY
FOR RIGHT.
>> WE WANT TO SEE THE CAR'S
EYES AND SO WHEN WE DO THAT
THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS ABOUT
WARNING AND WE USE THAT RIGHT.
>> WHAT ABOUT THOSE DRIVERLESS
CARS?
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE ARE TALKING
ABOUT THOSE WE THINK THOSE ARE
GOING TO BE COOL FOR US RIGHT.
>> BUT WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THERE'S SOME WAY WE KNOW
THAT THEY SEE US AND RECOGNIZE
US RIGHT.
>> SO AS WE SHOULD TALKING
ABOUT THIS WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THESE DIFFERENT TYPES OF ROADS
AND DIFFERENT TYPES OF THINGS
IN ANN ARBOR.
DID YOU KNOW IF YOU'RE
IN THE
CROSSWALK, GUESS WHAT?
YES.
THE CAR STOP.
>> DOES THAT HAPPEN HERE?
NO, NO.
THANK YOU, ANN ARBOR.
>> WE LOVE YOU FOR THAT.
AND THOSE CARS NOT MEANS WE CAN
GET THERE AND WE CAN STOP AND
WE FEEL WHAT WE FEEL SAFER,
RIGHT?
>> YES, IT'S DIFFERENT.
SOME OF YOU GUYS GO BIKE RIDING
WITH ME IN ANN ARBOR.
>> SEAN AND WHAT BIKES DID YOU
RIDE IN THE BIKES?
THE SPIN BIKES.
RIGHT.
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT THE
SPIN TWO THUMBS UP YOU WHAT
MADE THEM SO COOL FAST FAST AND
I DON'T KNOW WHICH ONE OF YOU
SAID IT BUT I THINK THE WORD
THAT WAS COINED WAS IT FEELS
LIKE I'M ALWAYS GOING DOWNHILL
SO I THINK BIKE SHOULD TAKE
THAT IN MARKET THAT SEAN A. YOU
GUYS DON'T TAKE CREDIT FOR
THAT.
SO MARKET I'D BEEN RECORDED
YEARS OF ANYBODY SAYS ANYBODY
FEELS LIKE YOU'RE ALWAYS GOING
DOWNHILL.
>> THAT'S A TRADEMARK, RIGHT?
BUT WE DO WE LIKE THOSE COOL
GUYS.
>> THE STUFF WE'RE SHARING
ABOUT ROADS ABOUT THAT A LOT
OF PEOPLE KNOW BUT A LOT
OF TIMES WHEN SOMEBODY SPEAKS
UP SOMEBODY IN A CAR SAYS IT'S
GOING TO SLOW US DOWN.
I HEARD SOME DISCUSSION EARLIER
ABOUT TRAFFIC FLOW AND HOW THE
CARS GET TO AN AREA AND WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN IF BUSSES SLOW
IT DOWN AND AND YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT A ZERO THING.
YES, WELL, WE'RE ZERO I NEVER
HEARD OF IT.
NEVER HEARD OF I KNOW SOMETHING
I HAVEN'T SHARED ENOUGH WITH
THAT I FEEL BAD ZERO MEANS
THESE GUYS SITTING AT THIS
COMMITTEE MEANS ZERO PEOPLE
SHOULD DIE GETTING TO WORK OR
WALKING OR BIKING OR
TRANSFERRING THAT THEIR STEPS.
>> DOES THAT SOUND GOOD?
>> DOES IT SOUND LIKE WHAT WE
SHOULD BE DOING?
WHAT TYPE OF ROADS COULD LEAD
TO ZERO DEATHS MEAN ROADS OR
NICE ROADS?
>> I SUPPOSE SO THESE GUYS
SHOULD JUST BE MAKING NICE
ROADS.
THEY SHOULD BE MAKING PLACES
THAT WE'RE NOT FREE TO WALK
GUYS.
SO YOU GUYS HAVE JOBS HERE IN
YOUR STATE?
>> YEP.
YEP.
AND YOU GUYS ARE PAYING TAXES
AND I WANT TO GET A JOB AND SO
VIEW OF A JOB AND YOU'RE PAYING
TAXES THEY SHOULD BE MAKING
ROADS FOR YOU YOUR TAX DOLLARS
PAY FOR THOSE ROADS.
SOMETIMES PEOPLE THINK OF DOING
IT JUST OUT OF THE GOODNESS
OF THEIR HEARTS BUT YOU GUYS
CAN'T GET TO WORK IF YOU CAN'T
WALK THERE.
YOU CAN'T SUPPORT YOURSELF AND
BE INDEPENDENT IF YOU CAN'T
RIDE YOUR BIKE TO WORK.
>> AND WE'RE LOOKING AT
INDEPENDENCE HERE IF YOU WANT
TO BE INDEPENDENT AND YOU WANT
TO LIVE ON YOUR OWN.
>> YES, YOU WANT TO BE ABLE TO
WALK TO WORK A TO WORK WHATEVER
YOU WANT TO RIDE YOUR BIKE.
>> YEAH, IT'S FASTER RIDING A
BIKE IT'S MUCH COOLER GUYS WE
ALL KNOW THAT I LIVE ON MY OWN
.
>> I HAVE WELL IN THAT AND SO
PETE DOESN'T TALK ABOUT A LOT
ABOUT RELATIONSHIPS.
I REALLY DO THINK THAT IT'S
REALLY COOL YOU WANT TO LIVE ON
YOUR OWN WITH YOUR PARTNER
RIGHT.
AND THAT'S REALLY COOL AND YOU
WANT TO BE INDEPENDENT.
YEAH.
SO AS WEIRD AS WE'RE CONTINUING
ON WITH WHAT WE'RE DISCUSSING
HERE ABOUT THE ROADS AND THE
SAFETY, WE WANT TO SEE WHAT
TYPE OF ROADS NOT NICE ROADS.
LET'S TELL THEM WHAT MAKES A
NICE ROOM, WHAT MAKES A NICE
ROAD WHEN THE CARS CAN SEE YOU
WHO WHO WANTS TO BE NEXT TO
CARS?
YOU KNOW THAT REALLY ONE DIAL
SO WE LIKE SEPARATION RIGHT
BETWEEN CARS AND IN THESE CARS
.
>> THESE IRANIANS ALREADY KNOW
THIS.
WE'RE JUST HELPING THEM OUT A
LITTLE BIT RIGHT.
>> SO WE WANT CARS NOT TO BE
NEAR US.
WE WANT CARS TO BE WHAT NICE
AND DO THAT.
>> WE JUST DON'T WANT PEOPLE TO
BE MEAN RIDING AROUND AND
THAT'S WHAT WE WANT MORE PEOPLE
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE GOT REALLY
DEEP AT EACH OTHER.
>> THEY'RE HONKING EACH OTHER
AND SOMETIMES NOT PUTTING OFF
WITH THE OTHER BUT CUTTING US
OFF THE OTHER TRUCKS AND THE
CAR THE COUPLE THAT WILL CALL
THE COMPANY.
>> AND ALSO HERE'S THE THING
THAT'S LIKE WE'LL LOOK AT THE
LICENSE PLATE.
SO LOOKING AT THE TIME AND
LOOKING THROUGH THIS, DID YOU
KNOW ANN ARBOR TO LIKE PASS A
VERY SPECIFIC COLOR MAYBE NO
COLOR LIKE ORANGE OR SOMETHING
TO BE NO RED FOR THE BUS STOP
DRINKING GREEN?
YEAH, THE COLORED GREEN THEY
NEED THESE GREEN LANES AND IT'S
GREEN BOXES WE CAN RIDE ALL THE
CARS CAN SEE THEY KNOW THAT
THAT'S YOUR AREA.
>> THIS IS THEIR AREA.
YOU KNOW WHAT ELSE THEY DID?
IT PUTS THE ADDED STICKS AND
THEY PUT THOSE STICKS IN THERE
SO THE CARS THAT HIT THE STICKS
BEFORE THEY HIT WHO YEAH AND
THAT'S NICE.
>> AND SO THOSE PROTECTED BIKE
LANES IS WHAT THE CALL IS AND
THAT MAKES IT BETTER SOBRIETY.
>> RIGHT.
THAT WE HAVE A LOT OF AMAZING
STORIES.
YOU GUYS HAVE A LOT OF AMAZING
STORIES YOU CAN HEAR HERE ARE
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MAKING
OUR COMMUNITY SAFE.
>> WE WANT ENOUGH TIME TO CROSS
THE STREET.
>> RIGHT.
WE HAVE FRIENDS IN WHEELCHAIRS
SO WHAT DO WE WOULD LIKE TO SEE
BUTTONS THAT COULD EXTEND A
TIME TO GIVE INDIVIDUALS WITH
DISABILITIES MORE LIKE SHAYLER
YOU HAVE DOWN SYNDROME, RIGHT?
AND DOWN SYNDROME SOMETIMES
CAUSES LOW MUSCLE TONE PART
ISSUES.
>> RIGHT.
AND I WANT TO BE A PART ISSUES
AND SO YOU CAN'T WALK AS FAST
AS ANYBODY ELSE.
>> YOU HAVE SHORT LEGS RIGHT
NOW AND SO YOU DON'T GET ACROSS
SO UNFORGIVING.
SO WHEN INSTEAD OF US JUST
HAVING A BUTTON TO SLOW IT DOWN
FOR THAT, WHAT ABOUT A
DISABILITY BUTTON THAT COULD
EXTEND THE TIME?
>> WOULD YOU GUYS LIKE THAT?
YEAH AND WHAT ABOUT IT GIANTESS
AND I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING A
LITTLE DIFFERENT BUT YOU GET
ANXIETY WHEN PEOPLE ARE BEING
NICE TO MEET ME.
>> I HAVE LIKE ELEVEN.
YEAH.
>> SO NOW THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT TRANSPORTATION RIGHT BACK
TO THAT ROOM TO FOCUS ON THAT
ONE ABOUT WARNING PLATES SHOULD
THERE BE ONE IN PLACE AT EVERY
INTERSECTION AND THAT SOME
DON'T SOME DON'T IT DOESN'T
MAKE YOU MAD MUCH RIGHT NOW IN
OUR CAR HAS THIS PROBLEM TOO
THAT FOR ITS CRITICS WHO HAS
NEVER GOTTEN MR CARPENTER HERE
IS IN CHARGE OF THE BUSSES IN
ANN ARBOR OR SO WE GO TO
YPSILANTI AND WE WORK WITH
THOSE GROUPS.
HE'S THE EXPERT WHO RUNS THE
LINE WHICH IS JUST LIKE THE
MARQUART SYSTEM WHEN THEY SET
UP A BUS STOP AND ALSO THEY SET
UP A BUS STOP ON THE OTHER SIDE
FOURTH STREET.
>> WHAT'S THE PROBLEM?
IT'S THE TIME ISN'T IT?
WHAT YOU CAN YOU CROSS 42ND
STREET THERE YOU THAT MOST BUS
STOPS YOU DON'T KNOW YOU HAVE
THAT YOU TO WALK RIGHT.
>> YOU GOT TO WALK A LONG WAYS
AND COME ACROSS.
DO YOU EVER SEE PEOPLE CROSSING
AT PLACES LIKE CROSSWALKS TO
GET ACROSS TO THE BUS STOP?
>> YOU GET A LOT OF THAT AND
THEY WALK ON THE GRASS.
THEY DO.
THAT IS SCARY, RIGHT?
SO ONE THING IS THIS WE LOVE
BUS STOPS AND MORE BUS STOPS
WHEN THEY'RE PLACED.
WE NEED TO WORK WITH THE CITIES
TO TALK WITH SYSTEMS OF HOW DO
WE GET THOSE CROSSWALKS CLOSER
TO THE BUS STOP IF WE HAVE A
BUS STOP ON ONE SIDE OF THE
ROAD, WHY DON'T WE HAVE A
CROSSWALK OR AN IMMEDIATE
ACCESS TO THE OTHER SIDE THE
ROAD AND SO THIS INFRASTRUCTURE
STUFF THE CHALLENGE WITH THAT
IS BOTH THE CITY AND THE BUS
SYSTEM HAVE TO WORK TOGETHER
BUT SOMETIMES IT'S THE CITY THE
COUNTY AND THE BUS SYSTEM AND
SOMETIMES EVEN THE CITY THE
COUNTY, THE STATE.
>> SO IT'S A LOT BIGGER.
THERE'S TOO MANY THERE'S SO
MUCH MORE PEOPLE MAKES IT SO
TOUGH BELIEVE ME.
YOU SEE THE SMILES THERE.
>> THEY KNOW IT'S TOO MANY
PEOPLE AND THEY MAKE IT TOUGH
TO MAKE THOSE DECISIONS
SOMETIMES FORGET WHEN PEOPLE
WALKED IN THE DOOR AND THEY
SEEN THAT THEY LOOK WHEN YOU
WERE IN THE DARK.
>> SO IF IT'S IN THE DARK WE
GET SCARED RIGHT NOW WE LIKE
LIGHTS ON OUR SIDEWALKS.
YES, DO WE WANT PEOPLE TO BE
ABLE TO SEE US WALKING?
>> DO WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO SEE
OTHER PEOPLE WHEN WE'RE WALKING
BECAUSE IT'S NICE TO GIVE US
WHAT SPACE SPACE RIGHT.
>> AND TO BE SAFE.
OK, SO GUYS, WE'VE ASKED A LOT
OF QUESTIONS.
WE WANT TO ANSWER QUESTIONS OR
ANYBODY HAS A QUESTION HERE.
FEEL FREE TO ASK WHAT USUALLY
GOING TO HAPPEN IS WE TALK
ABOUT COGNITIVE ACCESSIBILITY
AND SO PHRASES AND BREAKING
THINGS UP AND EVEN DURING THAT
MEETING I WAS SAYING THINGS
DURING THE MEETING THEY HAD
ABOUT ROAD DIETS AND STUFF LIKE
THAT.
SO I MAY REPHRASE YOUR QUESTION
TO MAKE IT MORE ACCESSIBLE FOR
OUR STUDENTS SO ANYBODY WOULD
BE EXCITED TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS YOU MAY.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
QUESTION SIR.
>> COMMENTS TO PEOPLE HAVE YEAH
.
HI.
THANKS FOR YOUR WORK.
THANKS JOHN FOR YOUR WORK WITH
PEACON AND EVERYONE ON YOUR
TEAM.
I'M WONDERING IS THERE AN
EXAMPLE EITHER NEAR YOU OR IN
YPSILANTI OF A RECENT
IMPROVEMENTS TO ROADS AND
STREETS THAT YOU THINK IS
REALLY GOOD AND THAT AND THAT
YOU WERE REALLY HAPPY TO SEE
AND IS AN EXAMPLE FOR WHAT
COULD BE A MODEL FOR WHAT WE
SHOULD BE ASPIRING TO.
>> SO DO YOU GUYS REMEMBER SO
WE HAVE TWO BUILDINGS GUYS.
WE HAD THE BUILDING ONE WAS IN
LINCOLN PARK.
>> WE ALSO HAVE ANOTHER
BUILDING AN EXPLOSION AND SO DO
YOU GUYS REMEMBER YPSILANTI
BUILDING TO GO FOR THAT, RIGHT?
YEAH,
YEAH.
>> AND YOU REMEMBER MICHIGAN
HAVE A REALLY BUSY ROAD.
WHAT DID WE DO TO CROSS
MICHIGAN AND STUFF LIKE THAT?
YOU WHAT WHAT DID YOU GET TO
REMEMBER THAT YOU KNOW WE HAD
THE HAWKS SO THE HAWK ON
MICHIGAN HAVE WAS SOMETHING
THAT ALLOWED US TO CONNECT THE
BORDER TO BORDER TRAILS.
SO I THINK IF YOU SAY SOMETHING
THAT'S GREAT, THAT'S THAT'S A
GOOD A GOOD IMPROVEMENT.
ANOTHER IMPROVEMENT IS ANY TIME
WE HAVE TRAFFIC CALMING TO SLOW
DOWN VEHICLES IT HELPS WITH
PROCESSING WHEN YOU HAVE A
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT MANY TIMES
THERE'S A PROCESSING DELAY.
SO IF I'M LOOKING ONE WAY AND
CARS ARE COMING AT ME FIFTY
FIVE MILES AN HOUR I LOOK AT
THE OTHER WAY IT IS TAKE ME A
LITTLE LONGER TO PROCESS BY THE
TIME I START CROSSING AND LOOK
BACK THE WORLD HAS CHANGED SO
EVERY TIME WE CAN SLOW DOWN
VEHICLES MAKE IT SAFER FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO MAY HAVE A
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS OR
PROCESSING DELAYS
.
RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE JOB?
>> OH YEAH LARRY YEAH.
WHAT IS YOUR ORGANIZATION AGAIN
?
AND I I'M A LIAISON TO A
COMMISSION ON DISABILITY ISSUES
AND THEY MIGHT WANT TO KNOW
WHAT YOUR ORGANIZATION IS AND
WHAT YOU GUYS ARE DOING BECAUSE
OF OUR ORGANIZATION'S
ASSOCIATION.
YEP.
TRANSPORTATION TAKING BUSSES
AND WALKING AND IT'S NEVER A WE
HAVE BUILT IN YPSILANTI AND
LINKIN PARK THE MAJORITY OF OUR
WORK THIS GROUP HERE IS WORKING
OUR LINKIN PARK, THE PART
OF OUR OUR OUR COMMUNITY
EXPLORER GROUP.
>> SO THE GROUP IS PIAC.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
I WANT TO THANK YOU SO MUCH JON
JONATHAN AND EVERYBODY AROUND
THE TABLE THERE FOR COMING.
>> I'M SO GLAD THAT WE GOT YOU
GUYS ONTO OUR AGENDA FINALLY
IT'S INSTRUCTIVE BUT ALSO I
HOPE EVERYONE ELSE FEELS
INSPIRED AND YOU KNOW, IT'S
ALWAYS GOOD TO HAVE A STRONG
CONNECTION MORE THAN JUST AT A
THEORETICAL LEVEL OF WHY WE DO
WHAT WE DO AND WHY WE NEED TO
KEEP PUSHING AND KEEP GOING
DOWN THE PATH AND THEN AND
FOLLOWING OUR PLANS, DEVELOPING
OUR PLANS.
IT'S REALLY GOOD TO TO MEET AND
SEE THE PEOPLE THAT BENEFIT
FROM THE WORK THAT OUR CITY AND
OUR CITY STAFF ARE TRYING TO
DO.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR WHAT
YOU'VE DONE HERE TODAY FOR US
BUT ESPECIALLY FOR WHAT YOU AND
YOUR GROUP DO.
WHAT DO YOU DO FOR THE GROUP?
YEAH, IT WAS GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR COMING
TONIGHT AND FOR SITTING AROUND
FOR THE THE PREVIOUS
DISCUSSIONS BUT WE'RE HONORED
TO BE HERE.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
LETTING US DO THAT AND WE
DEFINITELY WANT TO MAKE SURE WE
KEEP SHARING TO THE COMMUNITY.
WE WANT NICE ROADS.
WE WANT PLACES WHERE WE'RE NOT
AFRAID TO WALK OR WE SHOULD NOT
BE AFRAID TO USE OUR COMMUNITY
.
>> THANK YOU GUYS.
HAVE A GREAT DAY.
I THINK YOU PUT I THINK YOU
SUMMARIZED IT AND PUT THE
THUNDER POINT ON IT THAN I EVER
COULD.
>> SO THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> APPRECIATE IT.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE ON TO THE ANNUAL CRASH
REPORT EVERY YEAR WE RECEIVE A
PRESENTATION FROM STAFF ABOUT
CRASH TRENDS OVER THE PAST YEAR
AND TRENDS OVER THE LAST FIVE
YEARS.
SO WE'RE JOINED TONIGHT BY
CYNTHIA RENNINGER THIS EVENING
WILL JOIN GIVE US A
PRESENTATION ON THESE CRASH
TRENDS.
>> CYNTHIA
, I ASSUME YOU'RE
GOING TO WANT TO SHARE YOUR
SCREEN OUT HERE, BUT I'M GOING
TO LET RAYMOND GO FIRST.
>> OK, YEAH.
I JUST WANTED TO QUICKLY
MENTION WE HAVE A I JUST WANT
TO BE COGNIZANT OF TIME SO IF
YOU'RE COMFORTABLE PROCEEDING
TONIGHT ON THIS, WE'RE HAPPY TO
DO THAT.
>> WE'RE READY TO DO THAT IF
YOU WANT ADDITIONAL TIME TO
DISCUSS IT, WE'RE HAPPY TO
ACCOMMODATE FUTURE MEETINGS.
>> SO I JUST WANTED TO BE
MINDFUL OF THAT AND I THINK
IT'S GOOD TO AT LEAST GET INTO
NOW BECAUSE YOU KNOW,
OFTENTIMES PEOPLE COME UP WITH
QUESTIONS AND REQUESTS FOR MORE
DETAILED RESPONSES, CERTAIN
CRASHES OR CERTAIN TRENDS.
SO YEAH, IF WE HAVE ANY
OF THOSE WE CAN COME BACK AT
ANOTHER MEETING BUT YEAH, I'M
GOING TO HAVE TO HOP OFF AT
NINE AND WE'LL STILL HAVE A BUT
JUST PUTTING OUT THERE THAT
IT'S TOUGH LAST NINE.
YEAH.
AFTER THIS IT'S STAFF REPORT
AND UPDATES SO BUT THAT'S AT
LEAST 15 MINUTES OR SO HERE FOR
TO GO OVER THE CRASH REPORT THE
HIGHLIGHTS AND IF THERE'S
QUESTIONS OR DETAILS YOU CAN
REQUEST MAYBE ANOTHER TOPIC IN
THE FUTURE.
SO WITHOUT FURTHER ADO, ASK THE
COMMISSION FOR HAVING ME THIS
EVENING.
MY NAME IS CYNTHIA RENNINGER,
ONE OF OUR TRANSPORTATION
ENGINEERS.
AS YOU'RE AWARE, LAST YEAR WE
SHIFTED OUR CRASH REPORTING
FROM A STATIC MODEL TO AN
ONLINE MODEL THAT IS AVAILABLE
TO THE PUBLIC AND YOU'VE HAD A
LITTLE OVER A MONTH TO SPEND
WITH THAT CRASH DATA.
I AM NOT WE DID NOT PREPARE THE
THE TRADITIONAL SORT OF STATIC
DOCUMENT AND PRESENTATION AS
HAS BEEN DONE IN PAST YEARS.
>> AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE HAVE ASKED THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION FOR
WAS WHAT YOU MIGHT BE
INTERESTED IN HEARING ABOUT A
LITTLE BIT MORE IN DEPTH SINCE
ALL OF THE DATA IS ALREADY
AVAILABLE TO EVERYONE ONLINE.
>> SO VERY BRIEFLY WE DID SEE A
LITTLE BIT OF AN UPTICK IN
OVERALL CRASHES LAST YEAR AND
THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS WHY
WE DO LOOK AT THAT FIVE YEAR
ROLLING AVERAGE TREND BECAUSE
WE CAN SEE THAT WE ARE STILL IN
THE DOWNWARD TREND AS FAR AS
THAT GOES FOR OVERALL CRASHES
FOR OUR SEVERE INJURY CRASHES.
>> THOSE ARE OUR FATALITIES AND
OUR INCAPACITATING INJURY
CRASHES.
WE ALSO NOTICED AN UPTICK IN
TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
HOWEVER, THAT TREND LINE IS
STILL CONTINUING DOWNWARD FOR
US ALTHOUGH IT DOES NOT
FLUCTUATE AS MUCH.
>> SO IT IS A LITTLE BIT MORE
OF A STABLE TREND LINE WHICH
WHILE THAT MAY SEEM
DISAPPOINTING IN SOME RESPECTS
WE KNOW THAT THROUGHOUT THE
STATE THERE HAS BEEN AN
INCREASE IN SEVERE INJURY
CRASHES SO WE ARE HAPPY TO SEE
THAT WE ARE STILL CONTINUING IN
THIS DOWNWARD DIRECTION JUST
SIMILAR TO IT.
I DON'T KNOW.
ARE YOU REFERENCING NO, I'M NOT
SHARING ANYTHING YOU I
INTENTIONALLY NOT SHARING
ANYTHING AT ALL OF THIS IS
AVAILABLE ON THE WEBSITE AND
LARRY SORRY COMMISSIONER KEELER
I WILL DEFINITELY BE VERY
SPECIFIC WHEN I AM SHARING
VISUAL INFORMATION THE SO
SIMILAR TRENDS ARE BEING
EXPERIENCED WITH ARE BREAKING
CRASHES AND OVERALL PEDESTRIAN
CRASHES AS WELL.
WHAT WE WANT TO DO THIS EVENING
WAS SOMETHING THAT DOES GET
BROUGHT UP BY THIS BODY ON A ON
A REGULAR BASIS IS AN INTEREST
IN REALLY TAKING A DEEPER DOVE
INTO WHAT ARE THOSE SEVERE
CRASHES AND AND THE SEVERE
CRASHES THAT ARE HAPPENING ON
AN ANNUAL BASIS.
EXCUSE PLENTY PLENTY OF WATER
WILL GET THROUGH BUT THIS WILL
TAKE SOME TIME.
SO IF WE DO AT SOME POINT IF
THE BODY HAS AN INTEREST IN
POSTPONING THE REST OF THE
PRESENTATION, THE REVIEW OF THE
CRASHES AND COMFORTABLE COMING
BACK OF A LATER TIME AND DOING
SO, I JUST DIDN'T WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT EVERYONE WAS AWARE
OF THAT.
SO I'M GOING TO SHARE MY SCREEN
NOW AND WHAT I AM GOING TO BE
SHARING WITH YOU IS INSTEAD
OF IT BEING A POWERPOINT
PRESENTATION AS I'VE DONE IN
THE PAST, THIS IS A SPREADSHEET
BECAUSE I'M AN ENGINEER AND I
DO EVERYTHING SPREADSHEETS.
>> IT'S A GOOD WAY TO STAY
ORGANIZED.
SO THIS IS A SUMMARY OF OUR
SEVERE AND FATAL CRASHES FOR
THE YEAR TWENTY TWENTY TWO THIS
SHEET OF THE SPREADSHEET
PROVIDES THE CRASH, THE CRASH
NO INFORMATION ABOUT THE
WHETHER IT'S AN INTERSECTION
CRASH CRASH LOCATION CRASH TYPE
THE NUMBER OF INJURIES THAT WE
HAVE THE DAY THAT IT'S OCCURRED
,THE TIME TRAFFIC CONTROL,
WEATHER, LIGHT CONDITIONS AND
OUR FOCUS AREAS OF OF OUR PLAN
.
>> THIS IS A LOT
OF INFORMATION.
I DON'T ACTUALLY EXPECT ANYONE
TO BE ABLE TO READ THROUGH ALL
OF THIS AND BE ABLE TO RETAIN
AND PROCESS AT THIS EXACT
MOMENT WE CAN PACKAGE THIS
TOGETHER AND AND SHARE THE
THINGS TO JUST POINT OUT ON A A
REALLY HIGH LEVEL HERE WE HAVE
ONE BLUE HIGHLIGHTED CRASH THAT
IS A CRASH THAT OCCURRED ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY ON U OF M.
S PROPERTY.
I DO WANT TO COVER THAT CRASH
JUST BECAUSE IT'S INFORMATIVE
OF THE REST OF THE DATA SET AS
WELL.
AND I'LL WE HAVE ORANGE
CRASHES.
NINE OF THEM WERE CRASHES.
IT INVOLVED A DOSE OF THE
INTERSECTION OR SECTION
CONTROLLED BY AMDOCS.
SO THAT'S JURISDICTION.
JUST QUICKLY, THE OVERALL
NUMBER OF INJURIES THAT
OCCURRED IN THESE CRASHES ONE
OF THE WE HAVE ONE PERSON WITH
A FATALITY.
WE HAVE TWENTY FOUR A LEVEL
INJURIES.
WE HAVE THREE B LEVEL INJURIES
THAT ARE IN THE STATE AND
TWENTY FIVE NO INJURY.
SO IF YOU THINK ABOUT IT,
FATALITY OR LOSS OF LIFE EIGHT
LEVEL INJURIES ARE INJURIES
THAT ARE INCAPACITATING AND MAY
RISK LOSS OF LIFE.
SO THOSE ARE THE SEVEREST TYPE
OF INJURY B LEVEL INJURIES ARE
THERE COULD BE SIGNIFICANT
PERVING SO ITEMS SUCH AS A
BROKEN BONE OR SOME LACERATION
OF BLEEDING ABRASIONS C LEVEL
INJURIES ARE INJURIES THAT ARE
SUSPECTED BUT MAYBE NOT
CONFIRMED AND MORE LIKE
BRUISING AND THEN PROPERTY
DAMAGE ONLY WOULD BE NO
INJURIES.
>> SO MOVING INTO THE CRASH'S
ON THIS NEXT TAB IS GOING TO
OUR FIRST CRASH.
IF THESE TAGS I HAVE ABOUT THE
LOCATION THAT I WILL READ OUT,
I HAVE AN IMAGE AND MY INTERNET
CONNECTION IS UNSTABLE.
SO IF YOU LOSE ME I APOLOGIZE.
I HAVE AN IMAGE OF THE CRASH
AREA, SOME INFORMATION ABOUT
THE CONTRIBUTING FACTOR AND
THEN I HAVE A NARRATIVE AND
DIAGRAM THAT IS TAKEN DIRECTLY
FROM THE TRAFFIC CONTROL ORDER
.
IF AT ANY POINT IN TIME ANYONE
HAS ANY QUESTIONS, PLEASE LET
ME KNOW AND I WOULD LIKE TO BE
ABLE TO ADDRESS THOSE AS WE'RE
GOING THROUGH THESE CRASHES.
SO THIS FIRST CRASH OCCURRED AT
EASE MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE AT
THE CANCER CENTER ENTRANCE.
THIS IS ON YOUR PROPERTY.
THIS IS A PRIVATE LOCATION.
SO WE DO OFTEN CALL THESE FROM
THE DATA SET SO THAT THERE
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE AS MUCH
INFLUENCE OVER IT HOWEVER AS
THIS IS A SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION, WE DO MAINTAIN
THE SIGNAL I FELT THE NEED TO
KEEP IT IN THIS TIME.
SO THIS CRASH OCCURRED IN
FEBRUARY AT SEVEN EIGHTEEN IN
THE MORNING IT IS A PEDESTRIAN
CRASH.
WE HAD ONE SERIOUS INJURY AND
ONE PROPERTY DAMAGE ONLY AND
THE IT'S A MULTI LANE ROAD BUT
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE AND IT HAS
A BIFURCATES OR BOULEVARD
APPROACH FROM THE CANCER CENTER
.
SOME OF THE CONTRIBUTING
FACTORS WERE THAT IT'S IS A
TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
IT WAS ON THE SURFACE WAS
SLUSHY.
WE HAVE A FAILURE TO YIELD THAT
OCCURRED IN THIS AREA.
>> SO UNIT ONE STATIVE SHE'S
ESTRAGON AS SHE WAS TURNING
THAT'S THE DRIVER.
BUT A VEHICLE DROVE IN FRONT
OF HER AND SHE TURNED TO AVOID
THE OTHER CAR AND FINISH THE
TURN STRUCK THE PEDESTRIAN.
>> THE PEDESTRIAN STATED THAT
SHE WAS CROSSING THE STREET AT
CANCER CENTER AND SHE SAW THE
BUS WAITING TO TURN THOUGHT THE
BUS DRIVER SAW HER AND STARTED
CROSSING THE STREET AND THEN
THE BUS WAS COMING FOR COMING
TOWARDS HER IN THE BUS STOP.
>> THIS IS A AN ILLUSTRATIVE
CRASH WHERE THERE IS A LEFT
TURN THAT IS IN CONFLICT WITH A
PEDESTRIAN WHO IS IN THE
CROSSWALK.
THE LEFT TURNS OF THIS LOCATION
ARE NOT CONTROLLED.
SO THIS IS A SIGNAL WHERE THE
LEFT TURN ALWAYS HAS BEEN AND
IS GOING WITH THE THROUGH A
TRAFFIC SO THAT DOES ANYONE
HAVE ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS
PARTICULAR CRASH THE SO TWO
THINGS I THOUGHT YOU HAD SAID
THAT WE OPERATED THE CITY
VANDIVER OPERATIVE THE SIGNAL
BUT THE ANALYSIS SAYS THAT THE
SIGNAL WAS OPERATED BY THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
SO IS A SIGNAL THAT WE ARE ABLE
TO CHANGE OR NOT I GUESS IS IS
THE QUESTION AND THEN THE OTHER
QUESTION I'D LIKE TO KNOW ABOUT
THIS CRASH THAT I'D LIKE
ANSWERED ABOUT THIS CRASH AND
THE OTHERS IS WHAT INITIATIVE
DO WE HAVE PLANNED TO ADDRESS A
CRASH LIKE THIS LIKE ARE WE
LOOKING AT PLACES WHERE LEFT
TURNS GO ACROSS ACTIVE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS FOR EXAMPLE
OR ARE WE DOING SOMETHING ELSE
THIS INTERSECTION AND THE
TRAFFIC SIGNAL IS OWNED BY THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
WE PERFORM MAINTENANCE ON THE
SIGNAL.
SO ONE ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE HAVE DONE AT THIS
INTERSECTION IS WE HAVE
IMPLEMENTED AND LBI THAT'S A
LEADING PEDESTRIAN ANIMAL TO
GIVE PEDESTRIANS THE BENEFIT
OF BEING ABLE TO ENTER INTO THE
CROSSWALK BEFORE TRAFFIC PASS
AS THIS INTERSECTION IS ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY, IT'S OUTSIDE
OF OUR CONTROL.
BUT THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE
ARE LOOKING AT WITH OUR
INTERSECTIONS AS FAR AS WHAT
WHAT ARE WE DOING WITH WITH OUR
LEFT TURNS?
HOW ARE WE CONTROLLING OUR
RETURNS?
HOW CAN WE UTILIZE PEDESTRIAN
PUSH BUTTONS TO ICE TO TIME
ISOLATE PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENTS
AND LEFT TURNS?
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
DOING ON OUR SYSTEM WAS CLOSED
BEFORE OR AFTER THE LP WAS
IMPLEMENTED
.
>> THIS CRASH WAS IN FEBRUARY
OF TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
>> I DON'T HAVE AN EXACT DATE
OF WHEN THE GUY WAS INSTALLED
AT THIS LOCATION BUT I DO
BELIEVE THAT IT WAS THIS CRASH
OCCURRED AFTER I WAS INSTALLED
AND NOW THIS IS ALSO A VERY
BUSY TIME IN THE MORNING AND
I'M SURE THERE WAS A LOT
OF ACTIVITY GOING ON
.
DON'T SEE ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
FOR THIS CRASH LOOKING AT THE
TIME, DO WE DO YOU THINK WE
SHOULD SCHEDULE ANOTHER TOPIC
IN THE NEAR FUTURE AND THEN TO
CONTINUE GOING THROUGH THESE
JUST YEAH, I THINK THESE ARE
CONSTRUCTIVE, YOU KNOW, THIS
PROCESS AND IF YOU NEED MORE
TIME YOU KNOW THIS IS THE FIRST
OUT OF WHAT TWENTY SOME YEAH.
IT'S REALLY THE DISCRETION THE
COMMISSION WOULD SAY TO GET
THROUGH ALL TWENTY FIVE OF THEM
WILL TAKE A FAIR AMOUNT OF TIME
SO BUT WE'RE HERE AS LONG AS
YOU WANT TO BE HERE.
>> YEAH NO I DON'T THINK IT'S
FEASIBLE TO DO THEM TONIGHT
OBVIOUSLY.
SO LET'S GET TO ANOTHER TOPIC
AGENDA TOPIC IN THE NEAR FUTURE
AND YOU KNOW MAYBE JUST IN THE
INTEREST OF TIME FOR THAT TOPIC
IF THERE ARE TYPES OF CRASHES
THAT CAN BE REPRESENTED BY ONE
IN PARTICULAR, MAYBE JUST I
COULD SEE SPENDING A COUPLE
HOURS ON TWENTY SOME OF THESE
YOU KNOW THERE ARE SEVEN OR
EIGHT OF THE PARTICULAR TYPE
THAT WE CAN MAYBE PICK ONE TO
REPRESENT THOSE.
BUT THIS IS YOU KNOW, THIS
LEVEL DETAILED ANALYSIS IS
SOMETHING THAT I THINK IN MY
THREE OR FOUR YEARS ON
COMMISSION WE'VE KIND OF BEEN
CLAMORING FOR AND SO I REALLY
AM HAPPY TO SEE THE I'M
THRILLED TO HAVE GONE THROUGH
ONE OF THESE BUT SO I WANT TO
HAVE APPROPRIATE TIME TO
CONTINUE GOING THROUGH THEM SO
WE'LL WE'LL TALK ABOUT THAT IN
OUR NEXT AGENDA SETTING MEETING
.
BUT THIS IS TO ME THIS IS
EXACTLY I THINK WHAT I WHAT I
YOU KNOW, I'VE BEEN KIND
OF INTERESTED IN SEEING FOR A
NUMBER OF YEARS BECAUSE YOU
KNOW, THE QUESTION THAT PETER
ASKED HELPS US ADVOCATE FOR AND
UNDERSTAND SOLUTIONS GENERALLY
.
SO ANY COMMENTS IS THAT SOUNDS
LIKE SOMETHING YEAH.
THIS TIMING IS FINE.
WHAT I CAN SAY ABOUT OUR
CRASHES FOR TWENTY TWENTY THREE
IS THAT MOST OF THEM ARE FAIRLY
UNIQUE AND THEY CAN BE BROADLY
CATEGORIZED AS BEING PEDESTRIAN
BICYCLE RELATED ANGLE CRASHES
OR SINGLE FIXED FIXED OBJECT
CRASHES.
THE TWO FIXED OBJECT CRASHES
ARE SIMILAR BUT ALSO PRETTY
UNIQUE.
THE ANGLE CRASHES SO THOSE ARE
CRASHES WHERE SOMEONE WHO IS
WHO IT'S EITHER A TURN AGAINST
A THROUGH TRIP OR CONFLICTING
THROUGH TRIPS THAT ARE
RESULTING IN A CRASH.
THOSE ARE ARE FAIRLY SIMILAR
BUT THE REST OF THEM ARE
ACTUALLY FAIRLY UNIQUE
CIRCUMSTANCES AND MAYBE ALSO IN
THE WHEN WE DO BRING THIS BACK
IF WE COULD INCLUDE IN THE
PACKET THE DETAILS OF THAT
COMMISSIONERS CAN COME TO THE
MEETING WITH SPECIFIC QUESTIONS
AND MAYBE HELP GUIDE THE
CONVERSATION IN A REASONABLE
AMOUNT OF TIME.
THANKS, MOLLY.
BUT IN A MORE REASONABLE AMOUNT
OF TIME RATHER THAN JUST KIND
OF GOING IN WITH IT BEING
COMPLETELY FRESH EACH CRASH.
SO YEAH, MAYBE WE'LL IF WE GET
SOME OF THE DETAILS BEFORE
AGENDA TOPIC THAT WOULD HELP,
YOU KNOW, GO THROUGH THESE IN A
REASONABLE AMOUNT OF TIME.
SO LET'S PLAN ON THAT.
THANK YOU FOR DEFINITELY FOR
THE SUMMARY THOUGH.
YOU KNOW THE SHOWING THE LIST
OF ALL THE TWENTY TWENTY TWO
EIGHT CRASHES.
YEAH.
LET'S DIG INTO THE DETAILS MORE
LATER.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S SEE NO ONE.
SO LET'S MOVE ON TO QUICKER
VERSION I GUESS OF THE STAFF
REPORT AND UPDATES, RAYMOND, IF
YOU WANT TO TO TAKE US THROUGH
.
>> YES, I SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO
THAT.
>> HOPEFULLY THAT'S SHARING
APPROPRIATELY NOW.
UM, SO THE REPORT GETS SHORTER
THIS TIME OF YEAR AS MORE
PROJECTS GET FINISHED.
SO RESURFACING PROJECT MOST
OF THE WORK IS COMPLETED AND
THAT WHICH IS NOT IS BEING
PUSHED TO TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
CHURCHES PRETTY MUCH ALL DONE
THE ROAD WORK IS DONE, THE
SIDEWALK IS DONE BETWEEN
GREENVIEW AND SEVEN SO THAT
PROJECT WILL PROBABLY COME OFF
THE LIST MOVING FORWARD.
UM SO THE SIDEWALK SECTION
SHOWS UP AGAIN ON THE SIDEWALK
GAPS COMPLETED ON CYO CHURCH
UNDER STREET LIGHTS WE'RE
TRACKING FIVE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY NINE STREET LIGHTS SO
FAR THAT HAVE BEEN REPAIRED
THIS YEAR.
TRAFFIC CALMING SEE GRANGER
WHAT WE CALL PART ONE FROM
STATE PACARD IS LIKELY GOING TO
BE CONSTRUCTED IN EARLY TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR.
WE WERE HOPING TO GET THAT IN
THIS CALENDAR YEAR BUT IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE THAT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN.
WE'RE WORKING ON COMMUNICATIONS
BACK TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD ON
THAT BALDWIN AND MANCHESTER
WERE APPROVED BY COUNCIL AS
WELL AS GRANDVIEW.
SO THOSE ARE ALL GOING TO BE
PROGRAMED FOR CONSTRUCTION IN
PROBABLY THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR.
WE'RE RUNNING OUT OF FUNDS THIS
FISCAL YEAR QUICK BUILD
PROGRAM.
WE HAVE BEEN TRYING TO DO SOME
INTERNET INTERCEPT SURVEYS AND
OTHER SURVEYS SO WE RECEIVED
NINETY ONE SO FAR JUST KIND
OF GAUGING PEOPLE'S
UNDERSTANDING AND INTEREST
ABOUT THE QUICK BUILD THAT ARE
OUT THERE.
SO THAT'S STILL ONGOING.
SO YOU HAVEN'T HAD A CHANCE TO
SEE THAT.
FEEL FREE TO CHECK THAT OUT AND
WE ARE WORKING CURRENTLY ON THE
NEXT ROUND OF QUICK BUILDS
WHICH IS THE PUTTING IN THE
PROTECTED BIKE LANES.
SO WE DO HOPE TO BRING A FUTURE
AGENDA ITEM TO HEAR THAT DESIGN
IS WRAPPED UP BY NEXT MONTH.
HOPEFULLY WE CAN DO IT THEN THE
BIKE CORRAL OR BIKE PARKING
PILOT PROGRAM HAS LAUNCHED.
SO IF YOU KNOW OF BUSINESSES OR
OTHER AREAS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAY SPECIFICALLY OUTSIDE
OF DOWNTOWN WHERE YOU THINK
THERE COULD BE SOME NEW BIKE
PARKING ADDED AGAIN IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY NOT ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY THERE'S A WAY
TO DO THAT THROUGH THE CITY'S
PERMITTING SYSTEM.
IT'S A NO FEE PERMIT SO YOU CAN
GO INTO WHAT WE CALL STREAM OR
ENTER GO AND REQUEST THE SAFE
STREETS AND GRANT SAFE STREETS
AND ROADS FOR ALL.
MAN WE'RE WE HOPE WE'RE CLOSE
TO FINALIZING THE CONTRACTS
WITH FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION.
IT'S BEEN NINE MONTHS IN THE
MAKING A LOT OF BACK AND FORTH
WE CANNOT PROCEED WITH THAT
WORK UNTIL THE CONTRACT IS
EXECUTED.
WE HAVE A FINAL DRAFT FEDERAL
HIGHWAY THAT THEY'RE
CIRCULATING ON THERE THE BIKE
MAP WE'VE BEEN IN DISCUSSIONS
WITH WASHTENAW COUNTY AND
WASHTENAW AREA TRANSPORTATION
STUDY OR WATTS WHICH IS THE
LOCAL MPO TO MAKE IT MORE OF A
REGIONAL FOCUS AND SO WHAT'S
LOOKS LIKE THEY MIGHT TAKE OVER
THAT INITIATIVE AND SO WE'RE
CURRENTLY FEEDING THEM THE DATA
AND I'LL TAKE UP THAT
INITIATIVE MOVING FORWARD.
>> WORLD CAR FREE DAY HAS
CONCLUDED THAT HAPPENED AT THE
END OF SEPTEMBER.
FORTY FIVE PEOPLE LOGGED NEARLY
SIX HUNDRED TRIPS AND EIGHT
DAYS AND THEN LASTLY THE
ASSOCIATION FOR A PEDESTRIAN
AND BICYCLE PROFESSIONALS,
WHICH IS ONE OF THE NATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS DEDICATED TO
BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN
INFRASTRUCTURE AND PLANNING
NATIONAL CONFERENCE IS GOING TO
BE HELD IN DETROIT NEXT YEAR
FROM AUGUST TO FOURTEENTH AND
WE'RE WORKING ON SOME
SUBMITTALS FOR PROPOSALS AND
PRESENTATIONS.
BUT IF ANY YOU'RE INTERESTED IN
THAT THOSE ARE OPEN TO THE
PUBLIC AND YOU HAVE TO PAY TO
REGISTER TO DO THAT.
BUT THERE IS AN OPPORTUNITY
THERE SINCE IT'S BEING HELD
KIND OF IN OUR REGION.
I THINK THAT CONCLUDES IT.
SO PRETTY QUICK UPDATE TONIGHT
.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
AN COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE AS A
ON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION IF YOU HAVE ANY
REPORTS TO PROVIDE OR KNOW
ANYONE.
>> YES, JUST VERY BRIEFLY, THE
RIDE HAS BEGUN DISCUSSIONS THIS
WEEK ON ZERO EMISSIONS BUS
PROPULSION.
IF ANY OF YOU ARE INTERESTED IN
LEARNING ABOUT HYDROGEN OR
BATTERY POWERED BUSSES, WE HAVE
A GREAT WEBSITE, LOTS
OF INFORMATION.
LOVE TO HEAR YOUR FEEDBACK.
THANK THANK DENHA.
>> JUST WANTED TO LET FOLKS
KNOW THAT CITY COUNCIL PASSED A
RESOLUTION THAT WAS BROUGHT TO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION FROM
STAFF LAST MONTH REGARDING THE
SAFE CROSSINGS AND TWENTY THREE
EARTH HOUR US TWENTY THREE
CONSTRUCTION BEGINS WAS PASSED
UNANIMOUSLY.
WE ALSO PASSED ANOTHER
RESOLUTION AGAINST BUILDING A
WALL THROUGH ANN ARBOR AND ITS
PLANT TO WALL OFF THE RAILROAD.
SO HOPEFULLY IT LEADS TO ACTION
.
>> THANK YOU AND THE RIDE PART
TWO.
WE'RE ALSO GOING TO BE STARTING
ACTUALLY NEXT WEEK
OCTOBER TWENTY THIRD THROUGH
NOVEMBER TWENTY THIRD WE'RE
GOING TO BE GOING OUT LOOKING
FOR PUBLIC INPUT FOR THE
MILITARY SERVICES THAT ARE
SCHEDULED TO GO INTO EFFECT IN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
SO THERE'LL BE A COMBINATION
OF VIRTUAL MEETINGS IN THE
FIRST WEEK OF NOVEMBER AND THEN
INSTEAD OF DROP IN MEETINGS IN
THE SECOND WEEK OF NOVEMBER
YOU'LL BE ABLE TO FIND ALL THE
INFORMATION ON HOW TO SUBMIT
COMMENTS ONLINE BY CALLING OR
EMAIL OR THINGS LIKE THAT.
ALL THAT INFORMATION WILL BE
AVAILABLE AT THE RIGHT DAWG
STARTING NEXT WEEK.
THANK YOU.
I JUST WANT TO GIVE YOU A TRY
AGAIN
, OK?
IT'S WORKING.
THAT'S IT.
THAT'S GOOD.
THANK OK SO I'VE HAD A BUNCH
OF AUDIO ISSUES.
THAT'S WHY THERE'S ACTUALLY TWO
OF ME IN THIS MEETING RIGHT NOW
IS A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN KICKING
OFF I THINK I MENTIONED THIS
LAST TIME WE WERE HAVING THE
SUBCOMMITTEE MEETING ON
OCTOBER FOUR.
WE JUST WANTED TO GIVE
EVERYBODY A HEADS UP AND THEN
THERE IS A STEERING COMMITTEE
THAT'S GOING TO BE SELECTED.
WE'VE GOTTEN OVER ONE HUNDRED
POINT FOLKS HERE OF SO WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE AN INTERESTING
DISCUSSION TUESDAY BUT JUST
WANT TO LET EVERYONE KNOW IT'S
GOING TO BE OCTOBER .
TWENTY FOURTH IT'S OUR
SUBCOMMITTEE MEETING BUT IT'LL
BE ABOUT A YEAR I THINK
PROCESSES BUT IT'LL BE
IMPORTANT TO KEEP ON JUST GOING
TO GIVE THANK YOU ANY OTHER
COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS WELL MY HANDS
UP.
>> OH I DIDN'T SEE.
>> OK, SORRY GO AHEAD.
WELL FOR OUR COMMISSION ON
DISABILITY ISSUES WE WERE JUST
GOING TO BRING TO THE
COMMISSION'S ATTENTION THAT WE
HAVE INVITED COMMISSIONER HAAS
OR WHOEVER WANTS TO SPEAK ON
SIDEWALK GAS ISSUES HAD BEEN
BROUGHT TO OUR ATTENTION A FEW
SIDEWALK GAPS IN IN TOWN THAT
NEEDED TO SHOULD BE ADDRESSED
AND THERE WERE SOME STAIRWAYS
THAT PEOPLE WANTED TO EITHER
HAVE REMOVED OR TO HAVE SOME
KIND OF INDICATION THAT THERE
WERE STAIRWAYS COMING UP, FOR
INSTANCE, PAINTING A YELLOW
LINE WHERE THEY SEE THE
STAIRWAY COMING UP OR PUTTING
IN I FORGET WHAT THEY CALL THEM
AGAIN THE THINGS OF THE
CROSSWALK, THE BUMPS, THE
CROSSWALK SO THAT PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES, ESPECIALLY VISUAL
DISABILITIES CAN KNOW THAT
THESE STEPS ARE COMING AND THAT
WAS ONE THING AND THE OTHER
THING THAT THEY
THAT THE
COMMISSION WANTS TO BRING TO
YOUR ATTENTION IS THAT THEY'RE
GOING TO FIND OUT WHAT THESE
HOW THESE ROAD DIETS ARE GOING
TO AFFECT BECAUSE PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION AND PEDESTRIANS
ESPECIALLY THOSE WITH THOSE
PEDESTRIANS WHO HAVE
DISABILITIES AND AND HAVE TO
WORRY ABOUT TIGHT SPOTS BEING
DROPPED OFF IN OR BIKE AND CAR
TRAFFIC AT THE SAME TIME.
AND SO THAT'S THAT'S WHAT WE
HAD TALKED ABOUT AND I SAID I
WAS SUBLIMINABLE.
RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I AS ALWAYS, IF THERE ARE ANY
REQUESTS FOR ANY AGENDA ITEMS,
PLEASE EMAIL ANY OF US.
WE'LL GET THEM ON TO AGENDA
WITH THAT OF SO FOR FUTURE
AGENDA ITEMS I MIGHT IS THE
RIGHT WAY TO TO DO THAT.
>> THE ENTIRE TRANSPORTATION OR
DO WE HAVE ENOUGH YOU CAN JUST
EMAIL RAYMONDE AND OR ME AND OR
MECUM OK OR REGINETTE YOUR
PREVIOUS QUESTION WAS WHERE CAN
I FIND YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS MAYBE
JUST GO WITH RAYMENT OR YOU
COULD EMAIL THE ENTIRE BOARD
PERMISSION OR MENTIONING I
USUALLY BREEZE THROUGH YOUR
EXITS WELL AFTER THAT BUT DO
YOU HAVE SOMETHING THAT YOU
WANT TO I DON'T KNOW.
>> I WOULD BE HAPPY TO DO IT BY
EMAIL.
I JUST JUST KNOW THAT IT'S
EASY.
I KNOW YOU HAVE THIS EMAIL SO
LET'S GO WITH THAT.
YOU NEED EVERY MONTH TO SET THE
AGENDA.
>> SO IF YOU SEND IT TO
RAIMONDO'S
THANK YOU.
SO WITH THE NEXT MEETING WILL
BE HELD ON WEDNESDAY NOVEMBER
FIFTEEN TWENTY TWENTY THREE AT
SEVEN P.M. THAT WOULD BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING AND FOR THAT
MEETING I WILL I WILL BE
HELPING TO SHEPHERD A FAMILY
THROUGH DISNEY WORLD SO YOU'LL
BE IN THE VERY CAPABLE HANDS
AGAIN.
SO EVERYONE BE GOOD PLEASE
ALTHOUGH I'M SURE SHE CAN
HANDLE ANYTHING ALTHOUGH I'M SO
I WILL I WILL SEE EVERYONE IN
DECEMBER BUT YEAH NEXT MEETING
NOVEMBER 15TH THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS.
WE'LL ADJOURN AH OVER TWENTY
EIGHT TEN TWENTY TWENTY THREE
MEETING SAME THING NO
OBJECTIONS.
>> THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
HAVE GOOD NIGHT AND GIVE